3.3 Consortium as a whole ................................................................................................................................... 97
3.4 Resources to be committed ............................................................................................................................ 97 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  3  
Section 1: Excellence 
 
5G-SOLUTIONS is a flagship 5G-PPP project supporting EC’s 5G policy by implementing the last phase of the 
5G cPPP roadmap. It aims to prove and validate that the 5G capabilities provide prominent industry verticals with 
ubiquitous access to a wide range of forward-looking services with orders of magnitude of improvement over 4G, 
thus bringing the 5G vision closer to realisation. This will be achieved through conducting advanced field trials 
of innovative use cases, directly involving end-users across five significant industry vertical domains: 
▪ Factories of the Future 
▪ Smart Energy 
▪ Smart Cities 
▪ Smart Ports 
▪ Media & Entertainment 
The field trials will be used to validate both the technological as well as the business aspects of 5G for increased 
resilience, coverage and continuity, higher resource efficiency with concurrent usage by multiple verticals, boosted 
capacity and greater reliability. 5G-SOLUTIONS is in direct support of 5G-PPP’s aspiration to see new connected 
digital markets, and it contributes to the EC’s broader industry digitisation and policy objectives in support of the 
Digital Single Market, maintaining Europe’s leadership position in mobile telecommunications.  
 
A key advantage of 5G-SOLUTIONS is that two of the consortium partners (TIM & TNOR) have key roles in 
the project (i.e. project coordination and technical management) and are also the coordinators of the 5G-EVE 
and 5G-VINNI ICT-17 projects, respectively. Both of these actors  are committed to upgrade and support their 
5G facilities during and after the completion of t heir ICT-17 projects until the completion of 5G -SOLUTIONS. 
This will enable the validation of the vertical use cases to the latest available 5G 3GPP releases by Q3 2021 until 
Q2 2022 to ensure that the latest features will be supported before actual widespread 5G deployments in Europe.  
 
In particular, 5G-SOLUTIONS will provide: 
(a) a wide set of innovative and heterogeneous use cases spanning across five industry vertical domains in a 
complementary way. The use case scenarios covered in 5G -SOLUTIONS have been carefully selected as they 
require advanced 5G capabilities and performance, and they are expected to have a high future 
commercialisation potential. These scenarios will be developed and demonstrated with expert end-user actors 
in Living Labs, validating their technological performance conforming to target 5G KPIs specified per use case, 
as well as their business potential and ethical and social acceptance. For their validation, high-density locations, 
very high data rates and volumes as well as concurrent multi-vertical usage of resources will be addressed.  
(b) novel technological enablers for facilitating the execution of the field trials in an automated  and adaptable 
way, enabling efficient end-user engagement, and specifically: 
(i) a unified cross-domain end-to-end service orchestration enabling multi-domain slicing and 5G service 
lifecycle automation . Th is will be achieved by leveraging an existing state-of-the-art orchestrator 
(NOKIA’s Cloudband Director), which will be enhanced with new open -standards plugins, catering for 
multi tenancy needs at scale, extending beyond ETSI MANO. It will also enable automatic real-time service 
provisioning and multi -domain management of resources across different 5G infrastructure vendor 
facilities, thus bringing service automation and adaptation to a level that allows Zero-Touch Configuration. 
(ii) an innovative smart KPI visualisation system , leveraging cognitive machine learning techniques, big -
data analytics and cloud -computing approaches for facilitating the fast-real-time analysis, presentation, 
benchmarking and performance validation of reference 5G network KPIs against pre-defined target values, 
including use case specific KPIs as developed with expert end-user actors.  
(iii) easy-to-use intent-based APIs for stimulating innovation and fostering the development, portability, 
provisioning of and interaction with new user-friendly innovative applications by SMEs and vertical 
specific systems, irrespective of the underlying 5G networks, whilst guaranteeing high performance, high 
quality and responsible innovation. 
 
Our consortium comprises 26 partners covering 9-member states and associated countries, driven by industry 
heavyweights from European telecom operators (T ELECOM ITALIA, TELENOR and FORTHNET), relevant 
large industry 5G adopters  (PROCTER & GAMBLE , ENEL, IBM, GLAN, IREN, YARA ), leading telecom 
vendors (ERICSSON, NOKIA), SMEs (A2T, APPART, CEL, EBOS, ILS, IRIS, IRT, LIVEU, NURO, OMES) 
and renowned research organisations/academia (CTTC, NTNU, PIIU, UOP, WIT) that have close collaboration 
with relevant users or user communities . The majority of the consortium members participated  and/or still 
participate in 24 out of the 43  5G-PPP projects and in several 5G-PPP Working Groups , thus enabling 5G -
SOLUTIONS to build on and build from a broad canvas of previously supported 5G-PPP initiatives. 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  4
1.1 Objectives  
 
1.1.1 5G-SOLUTIONS strategic vision and central innovation  
 
 
5G-SOLUTIONS will conduct innovative field trials implemented over the 5G ICT-17 end-to-end (E2E) facilities of 
5G-EVE in Turin and 5G-VINNI in Norway and Patra . The respective coordinators in each of these ICT -17 
projects have key roles in the 5G-SOLUTIONS consortium, supporting a collective effort which aims to see a 
fast-track path to support the  new 5G network features as per 3GPP and 5G -IA trials release roadmap1. Hence, the 
central goal of the project is to demonstrate and validate the following imperatives, through the execution of advanced 
field trials and by directly engaging key industrial end-user actors:  
(i) the technological performance conforming to 5G network KPI requirements, defined by 5G-PPP2, as well as 
by other standardisation associations (e.g. ETSI 3GPP3, ITU (IMT -2020)4) and industrial alliances (NGMN5, 
5G-ACIA6, etc.), here on in  referred collectively as standardisation bodies ; where target KPIs have been 
identified and included in the Living Labs , which will serve as the benchmarking for the technological 
validation. 
(ii) the business aspect  through viable and sustainable business model  development and ethical assessment 
approaches, tested across heterogeneous industrial sectors that require the performance characteristics of the 
underlying 5G infrastructure.  
 
In particular, 5G-SOLUTIONS will validate more than 140 5G network-specific technological KPIs corresponding 
to 20 innovative and compelling industry use cases, in near real-time at high throughput, fidelity and accuracy, thus 
significantly accelerating and encouraging the uptake of 5G across the EU community . In order to fully reali se a 
sustainable 5G ecosystem, both technical and economic aspects will be assessed, together with the understanding of 
the related legal, social and ethical issues . These will include a prominent focus on “vertical” requirements for 5G, 
in growing interaction with, engagement of, and input from key industry verticals, including those highlighted by the 
5G-PPP expert groups.  
 
In pursuit of this vision, 5G-SOLUTIONS has assembled a network of leading pan-European actors in both horizontal 
industries (telecom vendors , operators and service providers ) and from five representative vertical industries , as 
mentioned above, the majority of which are members of 5G-PPP. The vertical industries have been selected and 
prioritised based on 5G -PPP published recommendations7, on the basis that they are  expected to have the 
highest potential commercial impact and citizen/end-user benefits over 5G networks.  A comprehensive, 
heterogeneous and complementary set of future-oriented use cases and services from these verticals has been selected, 
and these are aligned with the 5G-PPP recommendations8 (See Section 1.3.4.1). 
 
1.1.2 Objectives and measurable outputs 
 
5G-SOLUTIONS Overall Project Objective: To conduct advanced field trials of innovative and thematically 
diverse digital services that require 5G capabilities and performance in the vertical domains of Factories of the 
Future, Smart Energy, Smart Cities, Smart Ports and Media & Entertainment, directly engaging with end-user 
actors, so as to validate the technological performance of 5G technology in successfully serving them, as well 
as validate the business models and potential of these use cases prior to commercial deployment. 
 
The aim of the project will be realised through six (6) key interdisciplinary objectives that are designed to address 
the specific technical and societal challenges regarding innovation, dissemination and sustainable business models. 
Measurable results, quantified targets and related WPs are specified for each objective as summarised in Table 1.1 
below. 
 
                                                 
1 https://5g-ppp.eu/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/5GInfraPPP_TrialsWG_Roadmap_Version2.0.pdf  
2 cPPP contractual arrangement at www.5G-PPP.eu    
3 http://www.3gpp.org  
4 http://www.itu.int/en/mediacentre/Pages/2017-PR04.aspx  
5 https://www.ngmn.org/fileadmin/ngmn/content/downloads/Technical/2015/NGMN_5G_White_Paper_V1_0.pdf  
6 https://www.5g-acia.org/ 
7 https://5g-ppp.eu/white-papers/  
8 https://5g-ppp.eu/wp-content/uploads/2014/02/5G-PPP-use-cases-and-performance-evaluation-modeling_v1.0.pdf  
 
Through 5G-SOLUTIONS, end users will be able to  perform advanced technological and business validation of 
highly innovative and future oriented use cases in near real-time. This, in turn, will provide extensive and valuable 
feedback to the broader industry before wide commercial deployments of 5G mobile networks throughout Europe. 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  5  
Table 1.1: 5G-SOLUTIONS Objectives 
 
Objective 1 Innovation with vertical industry expert users : To develop realistic, advanced and business 
relevant innovative use case scenarios in five key vertical industries. 
Sub 
objectives 
▪ To develop and provide a representative set of detailed use case scenarios with appropriate 
metrics to test and validate the performance characteristics of 5G through industrial field trials.  
▪ To use and adopt state-of-the-art methodology in service design, innovation and “red-way-of-
working”9, facilitating effective ways of innovating with industry expert users. 
▪ To produce and assess the methodologies for the testing, validation and benchmarking of the 
results as well as for the technological and business validation of the use cases. 
Expected 
measurable 
results 
▪ Number of key compelling heterogeneous industry-relevant post-project exploitable use cases 
approved by the Living Labs (LLs).  
▪ Number of associated target technological KPIs documented based on testing and validation 
methodologies.  
Quantified 
Targets 
▪ At least 20 innovative use cases across 5 different vertical domains ready to be piloted in 
Living Labs in the field directly engaging end-user actors. Delivered by M5.  
▪ At least 140 5G network KPI measurements pre-determined target values. Delivered by M5. 
Related WPs ▪ WP1: Requirements analysis, use cases and methodologies 
 
Objective 2 Technology development and readiness: To interface with key ICT-17 facilities and develop the 
technological enablers for the validation of the use cases.  
Sub 
objectives 
▪ To analyse key challenges for performing multi and cross -domain service provisioning 
leveraging slicing and virtualisation technologies. 
▪ To build the necessary plugins in an existing Cross-Domain Service Orchestrator ( CDSO - 
NOKIA’s Cloudband Network Director). The CDSO will act as an umbrella orchestrator to 
enable automatic, unified, concurrent service provisioning, management and cross -domain 
orchestration across the underlying 5G infrastructure facilities. 
▪ To implement a web-based cloud KPI visualisation system to collect, analyse, homogenise, 
and pseudo-anonymise the data feeds obtained from ICT-17 facilities and end-users, in order 
to automate the analysis and the presentation of the measurement results in real-time. 
▪ To provide open-source APIs and interfaces to facilitate the interfacing with ICT-17 5G-EVE 
Turin and 5G -VINNI Norway and Patra facilities as well as for the development of new 
vertical applications by 3rd parties. 
▪ To install and setup minimum infrastructural extensions (e.g. remote 5G RAN nodes) for 
facilitating localisation through Multi-Access Edge Computing (MEC) in remote locations. 
Expected 
measurable 
results 
▪ Number of results leveraged and extended from previous 5G-PPP Phase 1-3 projects. 
▪ Deployment of a CDSO supporting automatic cross -domain orchestration, network slicing , 
virtualisation for service provisioning of use cases  and multi -domain management of 
resources beyond ETSI MANO, exploring Zero-Touch Configuration mechanisms. 
▪ Deployment of a KPI visualisation system as a service in the cloud for the presentation of the 
measurement results against a set of pre-defined KPI target values. 
▪ Provision of open -standard intent -based interfaces for orchestration, for the ICT-17 
measurement portals of 5G-EVE and 5G-VINNI and for the application abstraction layer. 
Quantified 
Targets 
▪ Extend at least 8 assets from previous 5G PPP Phase 1 and Phase 2 projects (see Table 1.3). 
▪ Availability of a CDSO to enable multi domain service provisioning, orchestration and 
management of resources, achieved by M12. 
▪ Availability and readiness of the KPI visualisation system (v1), successfully tested by M12. 
▪ Interface of the KPI visualisation system with the ICT-17 facilities by M12. 
▪ Availability of 5 remote 5G RAN nodes and open interfaces to the ICT-17 facilities by M12. 
Related WPs ▪ WP2: 5G infrastructure setup and operational readiness 
▪ WP3: Technological enablers for Living Labs 
 
Objective 3 
Technological validation : To d emonstrate the potential and the user value of  advanced 5G  
solutions through extensive technological validation in field trials directly involving end-users in 
Living Labs (LLs).  
Sub 
objectives 
▪ To conduct technological validation of innovative use cases for a number of vertical industries 
(Factories of the Future, Smart Energy, Smart Cities, Smart Ports, Media & Entertainment) in 
field trials. To validate the technological performance of 5G technologies and architectures 
                                                 
9 https://www.telenor.com/expert-speaks-why-telenor-can-make-this-transformation/ 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  6  
(slicing & virtualisation) in LLs successfully serving one, combinational and/or concurrent 
eMBB, mMTC and URLLC based applications benchmarked against relevant target 5G KPIs, 
fully aligned to 5G-PPP white papers, so as to prove and validate their superior capabilities.  
Expected 
measurable 
results 
▪ Number of 5G technological KPIs collected, analysed and presented. 
▪ Dissemination of the post-analytical 5G KPI results. 
Quantified 
Targets 
▪ Perform at least 140 measurement campaigns, to present achieved 5G technological KPIs per 
3GPP release (R15, R16 & possibly R17) over 3 consecutive testing cycles.  
▪ Provide a detailed impact assessment of the degree of compliance to 5G KPIs per 3GPP release. 
▪ Publication of three white papers, one per 3GPP release, presenting the degree of 
measurements of 5G technological KPIs achieved against target values.  
▪ Contribution of the performed measurements in a dedicated workshop with the relevant 5G-
IA Working Groups. 
Related WPs 
▪ WP4: Industry 4.0 field trials  
▪ WP5: Smart urban environment field trials  
▪ WP6: Enhanced User Experience field trials  
▪ WP7: Multi-vertical concurrent validation field trials  
▪ WP9: Dissemination, Communication, and Capacity Building 
  
Objective 4 
Business validation and innovation : To develop and v alidate the business models of the use 
cases in 5G-SOLUTIONS LLs in a coordinated way, directly engaging end-user vertical actors 
and their customers, whilst protecting strategic EU IP and ensuring long-term social acceptance 
and economic sustainability, extending beyond the lifespan of the project  through a joint 
commercialisation plan ; enable involved stakeholders and external international actors to 
understand and exploit the project results. 
Sub 
objectives 
▪ To ensure that all actors engaged in the 3 rd 5G-PPP Phase fully appreciate the business 
potential of the 5G technology for their applications and target market segments.  
▪ To provide the necessary business framework, strategy, plans and information to identify post-
project opportunities, exploit potential results and to ensure a long-term sustainability, whilst 
protecting their IP.  
Expected 
measurable 
results 
▪ Percentage of consortium partners presenting sustainable business models.  
▪ 5G-SOLUTIONS Innovation and IP protection report.  
▪ Networking and collaboration with international partners. 
▪ Number of associated target business KPIs documented based on testing and validation 
methodologies.  
▪ Market assessment and technology monitoring to enable the development of a realistic 
business development plan.  
▪ Ethical and legal assessments of the technology to ensure a plain future acceptability and 
sustainability of 5G solutions. 
▪ Achieve TRL6 by the completion of the project and recommend the path to achieve TRL9 
after the project’s completion. 
Quantified 
Targets 
▪ At least 60% of 5G-SOLUTIONS partners presenting sustainable exploitation plans.  
▪ 3 patent filings targeting 5G-SOLUTIONS innovation, filed at both European Patent Office 
(EUPO) and US Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) with a view to securing and protecting 
the competitive and commercial advantages within Europe. 
▪ Engage in at least 3 international co-operation activities with international partners to leverage 
project outcomes. 
▪ Provide business validation for each use case , directly engaging their real -world customers, 
and receiving appropriate feedback for further enhancements after their engagement. 
▪ Sustainable business development plan extending 3 years beyond the completion of the 
project, fully developed by M33, supporting an accelerated path to exploitation. 
Related WP ▪ WP8: Commercialisation activities, IP management and international networking 
▪ WP10: Project management 
 
Objective 5 
Contribution to standardisation, open source and communities : To provide significant  
contribution to relevant 5G standardi sation bodies, to relevant open source communities, to 
relevant industry standardisation and user/technology communities. 
Sub 
objectives 
▪ To identify areas in which there is a need for standardi sation, especially related to the ope n 
interfaces for the provision of concurrent and multiple service offerings across 5G networks 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  7  
(e.g. for transparent and unified operation and management of network slices and 
virtualisation, for the homogeneous standardised measurement of network KPIs, etc.).  
▪ To identify standardisation gaps and contribute to the relevant standardisation bodies (e.g. 
3GPP, ETSI MANO, NGMN, ITU), validating the results of these groups by real field trials 
with real end-users in 5G-SOLUTIONS Living Labs.  
▪ To offer an overview on innovative models of decision-making processes and public policies 
for managing the governance of technology in a 5G hyperconnected society. 
Expected 
measurable 
results 
▪ Number of contributions to standards with an adoption status.  
▪ Validations of specific 5G standards issued by the standardisation bodies.  
Quantified 
Targets 
▪ At least 5 contributions to relevant standardisation bodies with adoption status.  
▪ At least 3 vertical industry trials validating the output (technology, features, etc.) of specific 
5G standardisation bodies. 
▪ Contribution to 5G-PPP with at least 2 white papers based on the experiences in the validation 
of the use cases over the 5G technologies and addressing gaps with respect to 5G-PPP vision. 
▪ Elaboration of at least 2 policy briefs for wider policy-making actors. 
Related WP ▪ WP9: Dissemination, Communication, and Capacity Building 
 
Objective 6 
Dissemination and outreach: To disseminate and exploit the results gained from the project for 
the benefit of the European 5G and vertical industries, the university education and training of 
young and other professionals. To maximise project's visibility and facilitate dissemination  and 
communication activities; to create new knowledge and insights on how 5G technology enables 
the provision of such innovative use cases, providing a better understanding on the configuration 
of its elements across and between such networks ; to c ontribute to the European 5G-PPP 
Programme and to its objectives. 
Sub 
objectives 
▪ To scale-up the project by means of wide dissemination of results, relevant communication 
activities, incorporating exploitation actions and supported by a comprehensive community 
and capacity building program.  
Expected 
measurable 
results 
▪ Number of online communications means and promotional material. 
▪ Number of workshops and webinars established. 
▪ Number of online training modules. 
▪ Number of press releases, publications, newsletters and success stories. 
▪ Number of activities with international stakeholders and appropriate communities. 
▪ Number of communication partnerships. 
▪ Number of key international showcasing events to participate. 
Quantified 
Targets 
▪ 5G-SOLUTIONS’s online presence with a website and social media channels ready by  M1, 
promotional videos (1/year). 
▪ Demonstration of 5G -SOLUTIONS KPI visualisation system and presentation of 5G KPI 
results through 4 industr ial workshops, 1 pre -standardisation workshop  and 6 webinar / 
showcasing events for the LLs. 
▪ Dissemination through multiple stakeholders reaching a pan-EU network of 500+ actors. 
▪ Minimum of 15 press releases and publications, 15 newsletters, success stories and factsheets 
and 10 technical articles/policy briefs. 
▪ Development and delivery of at least 3 online training modules to >100 professionals. 
▪ Establishment of communications partnerships with appropriate communities, with at least 5 
relevant 5G project teams and at least 2 other H2020 projects across Europe. 
▪ Participation and demos in a minimum of 9 key international showcasing events, such as the 
Mobile World Congress 2020-2022, Global 5G and EuCNC events in 2020-2022. 
Related WP ▪ WP9: Dissemination, Communication, and Capacity Building
1.2 Relation to the work programme  
5G-SOLUTIONS addresses the RIA action of ICT-19-2019: Advanced 5G validation trials across multiple vertical 
industries topic’s challenge to propel the European 5G vision closer to deployment by  conducting innovative use 
case trials in the field across five impactful vertical industries, so as to validate that key reference 5G-PPP KPIs can 
be met. The 5G-SOLUTIONS objectives match the Commission’s ambitions in the aforementioned topic and address 
the aspects listed in the call’s specific challenge and scope as shown in Table 1.2. 
 
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  8  
Table 1.2: Alignment to ICT-19-2019 
Specific Challenge from the call text How 5G-SOLUTIONS will address the Specific Challenge 
The challenge is to get the European 5G 
Vision of "5G empowering vertical 
industries" closer to deployment with 
innovative digital use cases involving 
cross industry partnerships. It requires 
technological and business validation of 
5G end to end connectivity and associated 
management from two perspectives:  i) 
within the set of requirements specific from 
one application domain; ii) across all sets 
of heterogeneous requirements stemming 
from concurrent usages of network 
resources by different vertical domains. 
5G-SOLUTIONS’s vision is in line with the European 5G Vision and in 
support of developing new connected digital markets and contributing to 
the wider policy objectives of industry digitisation of the Digital Single 
Market. 5G-SOLUTIONS will demonstrate and validate the feasibility of 
serving in field trials, new innovative use cases that are expected to have 
a high business potential (as outlined in Section 1.3.4.1) that demand 
beyond today’s network technological capabilities. Both the 
technological and the business aspects arising from such innovative use 
cases will be validated in the Living Labs involving cross industry end-
user actors and their performance will be measured and benchmarked 
through specific target KPIs. Section 1.3.4 (Methodology) addresses how 
these two perspectives (single and multi-concurrent usage of resources by 
verticals) and their respective sets of requirements will be managed. 
Scope from the call text How 5G-SOLUTIONS will address the Scope 
a) Trials of various scales, depending on 
the target technology, in view of 
demonstrating that performance 
conforming to 5G PPP KPIs requirements 
are met in the context of specific vertical 
use cases. Target 5G technologies and 
architectures should also support specific 
performance requirements stemming from 
the considered vertical use case. 
20 innovative use cases over 5 vertical domains will be conducted in the 
field, testing in total more than 1 40 quantitative technological KPIs 
against predefined target values, obtained from the industry and the 
various standardisation bodies (part of WP1 work). The execution of use 
case trials will undergo an iterative feedback-loop process of validating 
the KPI s against three 3GPP releases (R1 5 up to including R17 if 
available by summer 2021 ) over the duration of the project . Different 
target technologies (slicing, virtuali sation, MEC, etc. ) will be used  to 
serve each vertical domain. The specific performance requirements from 
such vertical domains are al ready known from the vertical stakeholders 
involved and are listed in the KPI tables separately for each use case, as 
listed in Table 1.6 in Section 1.3.4.1. 
In addition, 5G technology and 
architecture trials are also targeting 
concurrent usage of resource by 
multiple verticals, addressing the 3 
classes of ITU requirements (eMBB, 
mMTC, URLLC use cases). In practice, 
the 5G infrastructure (RAN, back/ 
fronthaul, Core) will be shared among 
multiple verticals and applications, 
each asking for independent service 
guarantees and very different service 
requirements. Operations of one 
application in one vertical domain 
should not affect the performance of 
other domains/ applications. The trials 
should hence demonstrate that 5G 
architecture and technologies (notably 
slicing and virtualisation) enabling 
multi domain management of resources, 
beyond the ETSI NFV Management and 
Orchestration (MANO) and with cross 
domain orchestration capabilities are in 
line with these concurrent performance 
requirements. 
Alongside human-centric applications it is acknowledged that 5G needs 
to support a wide variety of Internet of Things (IoT), Massive Machine 
Type Communications (mMTC) and Ultra -reliable Machine Type 
Communication (U-MTC). The highly demanding disruptive capabilities 
of 5G require orders of magnitude of improvement over the current  4G 
technology and infrastructure and in this sense, the Living Labs have been 
grouped and structured around four field trial c lusters: (i) Industry 4.0, 
encompassing the Factories of the Future domain  primarily addressing 
URLLC use cases (WP4), (ii) Smart urban environment, encompassing 
Smart Energy, Smart Cities and Smart Ports, primarily addressing mMTC 
use cases (WP5) , (iii) Enhanced User Experience, covering Media & 
Entertainment, primarily addressing eMBB use cases  (WP6), and (iv) 
Multi-vertical concurrent validation  (WP7) demonstrating and capturing 
evidence through the relevant performance KPIs that network slicing and 
virtualisation are in line with concurrent performance requirements  and 
also, that there is no interference between vertical use cases in the 
presence of concurrent usage of resources.  
In order to support network slice management, dynamic service lifecycle 
automation and to enable automatic and concurrent real-time 
orchestration across different ICT-17 facilities, a CDSO  (NOKIA’s 
Cloudband Director) will be leveraged, to bind all 5G-related services to 
be piloted and to dynamically control their flows , subsequently 
facilitating the demonstration and testing of such innovative use cases in 
parallel. 
Trials leverage results of 5G PPP 
phases 1 and 2 and go beyond the proof 
of concepts of phase 2. 
5G-SOLUTIONS’s baseline will be pivoted around the foundational 
work of 5G-PPP projects, and incorporates the knowledge and experience 
of the consortium partners who are collectively involved in 24 out of the 
43 5G-PPP projects, as follows: 
▪ Phase 1:  5G-ENSURE ( TIM), 5G-EXCHANGE ( TIM, TNOR), 
GOGNET ( NOKIA, IBM, WIT), FANTASTIC -5G ( CTTC, TIM), 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  9  
EURO-5G (TNOR), METIS-II (TIM), FLEX5GWARE (TIM, CTTC), 
SONATA & SUPERFLUIDITY (NOKIA), XHAUL (TIM, CTTC) 
▪ Phase 2: 5GCAR (CTTC), 5G-MEDIA (IRT), 5G-TANGO (CTTC, 
NURO), 5G -MONARCH ( TIM), 5G -PICTURE ( TIM), 5G -
TRANSFORMER ( CTTC), 5G -XCAST ( TIM, IRT, LIVEU), 
NGPaaS ( NOKIA), METRO -HAUL ( TIM, CTTC), Bluespace 
(CTTC), To-Euro-5G (TNOR, WIT) 
▪ Phase 3:  5G-EVE (TIM, PIIU), 5G -VINNI (UOP, TNOR), 
5GENESIS (LMI).   
An analysis of these projects, showing how their  assets and results will 
be leveraged and build upon them will be included in WP1 (task T1.3).  
Vertical use cases may focus on those 
outlined in the 5G PPP White paper 
"5G empowering vertical industries" 
(Automotive, smart factories, energy, 
media, smart healthcare) though other 
may be considered (e.g. PPDR). High 
density location and very high data 
volumes applications should be 
covered, as typically encountered with 
media/content applications in large 
events. Trials are preferably 
implemented over the 5G end to end 
platforms developed under ICT-17-2018 
and may contribute to 5G 
demonstration in the context of large 
showcasing events. 
As outlined above, the vertical domains to be demonstrated in the 5G -
SOLUTIONS Living Labs include Factories of the Future, Smart Energy, 
Smart Cities , Smart Ports and Media & Entertainment.  High-density 
locations, typically encountered in large public showcasing events, 
involving very high rate data use cases serving a large number of end -
users concurrently, will also be demonstrated in these Living Labs (See 
Section 1.3.4.1). Trials will leverage and use selected 5G-EVE and 5G-
VINNI ICT-17 facilities  and some extensions will be introduced to 
complement them by installing local 5G RAN nodes in locations remotely 
to these facilities  (see Table 1.5 ). TIM and TNOR participate in 5G -
SOLUTIONS consortium and as the coordinators of the 5G-EVE and 5G-
VINNI projects, respectively, they will technically support the operation 
and the upgrading of these facilities even beyond the end of their projects.  
It is expected that the first results from 5G -SOLUTIONS will be 
demonstrated in large 5G showcase events, both within and outside 
Europe, such as the MWC, Global 5G and EuCNC events in 2020-2022.
1.3 Concept and methodology 
 
1.3.1 Concept 
 
The 5G-SOLUTIONS conceptual approach is based on:  
1. Formulating a wide set of innovative, heterogeneous use cases spanning across f ive vertical industries in a 
complementary way. The use case scenarios identified and described in 5G-SOLUTIONS are expected to have 
a high future commercialisation potential and 5G relevance, will be developed based on state-of-the-art innovation 
methodologies, and will be demonstrated with expert end-user actors in Living Labs, validating their technological 
and business performance conforming to target 5G KPIs specified per use case, taking i nto consideration high-
density locations, very high data volumes and concurrent multi-vertical usage of resource. 
2. Providing the technological enablers for facilitating the execution of the field trials over specific ICT -17 5G 
facilities, and in particular: 
a. Engaging a unified Cross-Domain Service Orchestration (CDSO) based on automation enabling multi-
domain slicing and 5G service lifecycle automation . This will be achieved by leveraging an existing 
orchestrator ( NOKIA’s Cloudband Director), which will be enhanced with new open -standards plugins, 
catering for multi tenancy needs at scale . Subsequently, this CDSO will  enable the automatic real -time 
provisioning and multi -domain management of resources , concurrently across heterogeneous ICT -17 
testbeds from different vendors and operators, thus bringing service automation to a level that allows zero-
touch configuration. 
b. Introducing a novel value-added concept for the development of a  smart KPI visualisation system, for 
automating the analysis and presentation of the results  obtained from ICT-17 facilities and presenting 
them through an intuitive user-friendly dashboard in graphical form in near real time. This will be achieved 
by leveraging big-data analytics, cloud-computing and cognitive machine learning approaches to extend the 
current state of the art in network performance monitoring , in turn creating a compelling real time KPI 
visualisation benchmarking capability in the field. 
c. a set of open-standards easy-to-use intent-based APIs, including application APIs for facilitating the 
development, portability, provisioning of and interactions with new user-friendly applications and solutions 
that require 5G capabilities  by SMEs and/or vertical specific systems . These APIs will support the digital 
transformation underway in enterprises and industry verticals, enabling them to prosper in multi-dimensioned 
business ecosystems.  
 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  10  
This conceptual approach creates a unique partnership opportunity between the technological and business (vertical) 
partners to drive joint commercial exploitation of the associated technologies and 5G services towards telcos, telco 
vendors and SMEs for creating even more innovative applications leveraging 5G technology capabilities. 
 
 
1.3.1.1 5G-SOLUTIONS high-level architectural concept 
The 5G-SOLUTIONS technical approach is based on a modular architecture in which the various technological 
enablers are integrated together via open interfaces and APIs.  These enablers will facilitate the measurement and 
visualisation of 5G KPIs  of the vertical use cases in near real -time whilst exercised in the field, as well as 
benchmarking and access from multiple locations, whilst promoting openness for 3 rd party developers for the 
development of new innovative applications. The architecture features automatic resource scaling, by leveraging 
virtualisation technologies and cloud automation scripts to elastically scale according to workload demand. This 
provides the necessary flexibility for the system to adapt to new interfaces, data sources, GDPR compliant data 
processing, machine learning and represen tation requirements as may be required during the interfacing with the 
ICT-17 facilities.  
 
Figure 1.1: 5G-SOLUTIONS high-level architectural concept 
 
 
The high-level architectur al concept  of 5G-SOLUTIONS and its constituent elements are based on the 
aforementioned objectives and d escribed below. With reference to Figure 1. 1, t he technological enablers  to be 
implemented in 5G -SOLUTIONS and  the interconnect ed 5G infrastructure  (i.e. measurement portals, slicing,  
virtualisation, 5G testbed orchestration and infrastructures from ICT-17 5G-EVE Turin and 5G-VINNI Norway and 
Patra facilities) are indicated in blue and grey colours, respectively. 
 
 
Innovative vertical industries use cases validated in Living Labs  
The use cases , which will be validated in the Living Labs,  have been carefully selected to represent compelling 
services that are expected to have a high future business potential and economic impact in strategic vertical industry 
segments that require 5G performance capabilities and which cannot be offered with the current operational 
capabilities of 4G . As representative examples, s uch use cases  have been  identified in the vertical domains of 
Factories of the Future, Smart Energy, Smart Cities, Smart Ports, and Media & Entertainment, which will benefit 
the most from 5G network deployments.  
 
These vertical domains, whose use cases will be technology-wise and business -wise validated in Living Labs , 
will directly engage end -user actors (industrial and their customers) and have been carefully grouped in three 
complementary Clusters (i.e. Industry 4.0 , Smart Urban Environment  and Enhanced User Experience ) as 
depicted in Figure 1.2, mapp ed with the eMBB, URLLC and mMTC service classes and aligned with the 5G -PPP 
Vision10.  
 
The description of such heterogeneous use cases, including their business drivers, their technological perspective, 
their test objectives, requirements and pre-defined indicative sets of target KPI values to be validated, are described 
in detail in Section 1.3.4.1.  
                                                 
10 https://5g-ppp.eu/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/5G-Vision-Brochure-v1.pdf  
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  11  
 
Figure 1.2: Smart mapping of 5G-SOLUTIONS Living Labs to ITU-T service classes 
 
 
Technological enablers 
 
Cross-Domain Service Orchestrator (CDSO) enabling dynamic service lifecycle automation 
 
NOKIA’s Cloudband Network Director (CBND) will serve as the  CDSO, which leverages E2E virtualised service 
functions and slicing, as per ETSI NFVI/NFV -MANO architecture11. It will be enhanced and expanded with new 
open-standards plugins to enable its integration with heterogeneous 5G facilities from ICT-17, in turn catering for 
multi-tenancy needs at scale and supporting network slicing imperatives. Examples to demonstrate such network 
slicing and virtualisation capabilities include: 
▪ Allocating certain network bandwidth per slice  – The CDSO can orchestrate this by triggering the needed 
configuration in the SDN controller, assuming that the latter supports bandwidth allocation per network. 
▪ VNF multi-tenancy – The CDSO can onboard and configure VNF's more than once as separate tenants.  
▪ Segregation – The CDSO can orchestrate the allocation of storage and Virtual Machine resources.  
 
Using the CDSO will make it simple to host, orchestrate, automate, and manage virtuali sed network functions and 
services, whilst benefiting from open -source innovation, making it a perfect candidate for facilitating the 
demonstration and testing of multiple and diverse service trials across the heterogeneous 5G ICT-17 facilities. In 
particular, the CBND automates network services delivery and operation in a distributed, multi-tenant, multi-vendor 
environment, while optimising and governing the usage of the infrastructure resources. CBND, an NFV orchestrator 
(NFVO) according to the ETSI-NFV reference architecture, is a ready-to-use software with two main roles:  
▪ as a resource orchestrator, it administers, monitors and optimizes NFV infrastructure resources and provides an 
aggregated view across geographically distributed NFVIs;  
▪ as a network service orchestrator, it onboards network services, which are a composition of VNFs, connected 
through forwarding graphs , which define service chains.  CBND automates network service events, including 
deployment, configuration, monitoring, updates, termination, and deletion. 
 
Multiple VNFs, including the forwarding graphs and service chains connecting them, are integral parts of the network 
service descriptors expressed using TOSCA, a standard domain -specific modeling language for network services. 
Together with an open source workflow engine and an open source policy engine, this ensures that  the CBND can 
manage any NFV service. The CBND can be easily extended and integrate d with many domain managers through 
plugins. Its northbound interface simplifi es integration with OSS systems.  Network Services in CBND include the 
VNF's that compose the network service and the network connections on these VNFs and PNFs (physical network 
functions) that may also play a role in the end to end service. 
                                                 
11 http://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_gs/NFV-MAN/001_099/001/01.01.01_60/gs_NFV-MAN001v010101p.pdf  
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  12  
Figure 1. 3 illustrates an 
example of Network Service 
components with their 
connections. The CBND 
includes a plugin system, as 
illustrated in Figure 1.4, in 
which APIs to the controlled 
entities (i.e. VNFM, PNF, 
Southbound systems) can be 
tailored by implementing a 
minimal set of APIs as 
required to su pport the 
specific entity. There are four 
supported plugin types and 
additional plugin types can 
be added for specific needs.  The out-of-the-box plugin types 
supported include  (a) NFVO-VNFM ( NOKIA) plugin; (b) 
NFVO-VIM (OpenStack) plugin; (c) NFVO-SDN 
(OpenStack-Neutron) plugin; (d) NFVO-NE (generic network 
element, subsystem or PNF) plugin.  
CBND supports also configuration of SDN networks as part of 
the Network Services flow.  
 
In addition to the above, 5G dynamic service lifecycle 
automation is required to be able to promote operational 
efficiency in network slicing and virtualisation. In this respect, 
5G-SOLUTIONS will explore zero-touch automation  
mechanisms in CDSO, so as to have all operational processes 
and tasks executed in an automated  way. Although such 
mechanisms are currently being explored by ETSI zero touch 
network and service management industry specifications 
group12, the actual implementation is in early stages and is 
being explored by the industrial partners. CBND’s highly 
flexible structure and ability to cope with any interface by 
adding the required plugin, brings service automation to a level 
that allows Zero Touch Configuration (ZTC). NOKIA is in 
advanced discussions with early adopters of ZTC to define and 
implement ZTC using CBND’s existing assets.  It is expected 
that automated lifecycle management will lead to OPEX reductions 13 and that service framework managem ent 
and admission control at the true user-service level may be necessary14. 
 
Smart KPI Visualisation system 
 
The use of a smart KPI visualisation system is considered as an important element to 5G-SOLUTIONS to automate 
and accelerate the analysis, benchmarking and presentation of the results from field trials, whilst being in the 
field, by using advanced cognitive big-data analytics and cloud-computing for rapid and automated processing of the 
vast amount of data obtained from the ICT-17 facilities. The smart KPI visualisation system will interact with the 
ICT-17 facilities’ measurement portals through relevant open-standards intent-based APIs. With reference to Figure 
1.1, the modular architecture of the smart KPI visualisation system consists of the following modules: 
 
Data collection and pseudo -anonymisation module: This is a core component of the system responsible for 
parallelised loading of the various data feeds collected from ICT-17 facilities. Data is ingested in native format until 
it is processed, pseudo-anonymised and encrypted with GDPR in mind, before storing it into the system’s database. 
Data is then prepared to be sent to the machine learning module for subsequent analysis.   
 
Real-time d ata processing and Machine Learni ng optimisation modules: These modules are responsible for the 
necessary data ingestion actions, data homogenisation  and calculations for presenting and benchmarking the KPI 
values in real-time, during field trials, against pre -defined target values  for each use case s cenario. Such values 
                                                 
12 http://www.etsi.org/technologies-clusters/technologies/zero-touch-network-service-management  
13 https://www.gsma.com/futurenetworks/wp-content/uploads/2017/03/704_GSMA_unlocking_comm_opp_report_v5.pdf  
14 https://searchtelecom.techtarget.com/tip/5G-service-lifecycle-automation-may-be-key-to-business-cases   
Figure 1.4: CBND plugin model design 
Figure 1.3: Example of ETSI/NFV network service components 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  13  
include, amongst others, data aggregation both in time and space, forecasting, prediction and fault recognition 
services. This will be realised by fusing relevant assets from APPART’s telco analytics platform and deep-learning 
algorithms for graph data with IBM Watson’s cognitive platform and assets from previous 5G -PPP projects (e.g. 
machine learning components from COGNET) , so as to  (i) optimise the modules at system level due to t he fast 
processing speed of the parallelised execution of the use cases, (ii) automate the analysis and presentation of results 
and create a real-time KPI visualisation benchmarking capability in the field. 
 
Web-based graphical environment : Th is is based o n web technologies and is available to Living Lab end users 
through an intuitive web-based dashboard. Once the end-users are authenticated to have secured access to the cloud-
based KPI visualisation system, they gain access to a dashboard that provides them with a choice of the use cases to 
be executed together with the corresponding KPI parameters and a selection of the graphical reports to display the 
outputs and results. In each report, the data is also available in a tabular format.  
 
5G-SOLUTIONS consortium’s intention is to offer the smart KPI visualisation system as a free cloud-based 
service to other ICT-19 stakeholders in order to accelerate 5G vertical service KPI measurement results. 
 
Open-standards easy-to-use intent-based APIs 
 
Starting with use case driven requirements, and with reference to Figure 1.1, the following set of “friendly to 
application developers” 5G facilitator APIs, will be implemented in 5G-SOLUTIONS, in order to simplify access, 
stimulate innovation and foster the development of new innovative applications for 5G networks: 
▪ Cross-domain management and orchestration interfaces to enable  (i) the onboarding of different vertical 
applications into service provisioning and management (API A); (ii) the interfacing of the CDSO with the local 
orchestrators (API B) of the ICT-17 facilities. The functionality of APIs A and B will be incorporated into  
NOKIA’s CBND plugin implementation. CBND is a service orchestrator with an embedded Openstack/Mistral 
workflow engine and such workflow adjustments will be implemented in the plugin via Mistral. 
▪ Measurement portal intent-based APIs (API C) to enable the interfacing with the measurement platforms of 5G-
EVE and 5G-VINNI ICT-17 facilities, so as to collect the data to be processed for the KPI measurements. 
▪ Application intent-based APIs (API D) offering an application abstraction layer to simplify and enable easy 
interfacing of new applications to any 5G infrastructure provider at the interworking layer. By capturing 
business intent and activating it throughout the network, application developers can bridge the gap between what 
businesses need and what the 5G network can deliver. 
 
 
1.3.1.2 5G-SOLUTIONS roadmap alignment to standards and ICT-17 projects 
The 5G-SOLUTIONS roadmap follows the 3GPP , the IMT -2020 and the 5G -PPP implementation roadmaps 
according to the evolution and upgrades of the 5G-EVE and 5G -VINNI ICT-17 facilities as shown pictorially in 
Figure 1.5. This is achieved through 3 iterative and consequential testing cycles in Phase 3 (as defined in Table 1.4 
in Section 1.3.4) each lasting for 6 months , followed by an evaluation period of 2 months to ensure a smooth and 
aligned evolution of the vertical industry validations in the Living Labs. The 5G facility infrastructure provider 
partners, i.e. TIM with 5G -EVE Turin, TNOR with 5G -VINNI Norway and UOP with 5G -VINNI Patra are 
committed to support 5G-SOLUTIONS after the completion of the 5G -EVE and 5G-VINNI projects by July 2021. 
In this respect, additional budget and/or effort has been assigned to these partners (see Section 3.1.4 task 2.1 
and Section 3.4) in order to cater for the support and upgrades of their 5G facilities after the completion of their 
ICT-17 projects, so as to be able to support the validation of the vertical services  with the latest available features 
and releases, i.e. either a more mature version of 3GPP Rel.16 (e.g. Rel.16B) or even Rel. 17 provided that such as 
version will be available by Q3 2021. 
 
 
Figure 1.5: 5G-SOLUTIONS roadmap 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  14  
1.3.2 Positioning of the project 
5G-SOLUTIONS envisages achieving up to Technology Readiness Level TRL 6 (‘technology demonstrated in an 
industrial environment’) as defined in Annex G of the work programme. The expected outcome will be functional 
field-trial demonstrators in the form of Living Labs, which will run in a near -operational environment (e.g. linking 
to isolated and production-congruent testbeds in order not to compromise operational systems for testing purposes).  
 
 
Figure 1.6: 5G-SOLUTIONS project positioning 
 
5G-SOLUTIONS will leverage, extend, integrate and advance  assets and technologies from completed 5G-PPP 
projects, as well as implement/advance commercial assets, raising their current TRL to 6-7 as listed in Table 1.3 in 
Section 1.3.3. In particular, and with reference to Figure 1.6 and Table 1.4: 
▪ The use cases in the Living Labs will start from TRL 3, evolve to TRL4-5 after testing Phase 3 Cycle 1, reaching 
TRL 6 after the completion of Phase 3 Cycle 3 by M34. 
▪ The smart KPI visualisation system components will start from TRL 4, evolve to TRL 5 after testing Phase 3 
Cycle 1, reaching TRL 6 after the completion of Phase 3 Cycle 3 by M34.  
▪ The methodologies to conduct the validation testing (i.e. for the definition of test reports format, parameters, test 
points, benchmarking of results as well as for the technological and business validation of 5G E2E connectivity 
and management across and within the verticals) will evolve from a starting TRL 3 to TRL 5 after testing Phase 
3 Cycle 1, reaching TRL 6 after the completion of Phase 3 Cycle 3 by M34.  
▪ Assets from 5G -PPP Phases 1 -3 (see Section 1.3 .3) leveraged and extended from TRL4/5 to 6/7 after testing 
Cycle 3 by M34. 
▪ NOKIA’s CBND, acting as the CDSO will start and remain at TRL 9 after the introduction of the plugins. 
 
Upon the completion of the project, the validated use cases can be offered to friendly end -user customers of the 
vertical partners, which will allow them to be proven in the market (as extension of WP8). The technical partners 
who will have a commercialisation benefit will support these customers in addressing potential technical difficulties, 
maintain and evolve the use cases TRL to 9, to enable them to be ready for commercialisation one year after the 
completion of the 5G-SOLUTIONS’ project.   
 
1.3.3 Linked research projects and related baseline assets 
5G-SOLUTIONS will build on the outputs and findings of completed 5G-PPP Phase 1 and Phase 2 projects (to be 
completed by mid -2019, coinciding with the commencement of ICT -19 projects) , ongoing Phase 3  projects 
(leveraging their ICT-17 facilities) as well as other relevant projects and commercial assets to seed its technology, 
including incorporating interdisciplinary knowledge and expertise. The project partners  are, in many cases , prior 
and/or current collaborators in 5G-PPP Phase 1, 2 & 3 projects. This ensures knowledge transfer of lessons learned, 
reuse of assets, testbeds and knowledge, and a strong working relationship together in support of a collaborative 
desire to see coherent industry impacts from the outputs of 5G-SOLUTIONS. Table 1.3 provides a summary of the 
most directly relevant and foundational contributions to 5G-SOLUTIONS from 5G-PPP Phase 1  & 2, ongoing 
Phase 3 projects (ICT-17 facilities) and commercial assets, and shows how project partners will leverage and use 
their assets, including current and target TRLs.  
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  15  
Table 1.3: Most directly relevant projects and assets from 5G-PPP Phases and 5G-SOLUTIONS extensions 
(Baseline) 
Existing Assets  
Partner 
Reference 
Projects 
Current TRL 
Target TRL 
How the assets will be used and/or extended in  
5G-SOLUTIONS 
5G-PPP Phase 1 
Develop the 5G RAN design and provide 
the technical enablers for an efficient 
integration and use of the various 5G 
technologies: spectrum management 
architecture, air interface harmonisation 
framework, agile Resource Manag ement 
framework, cross -layer and air -interface 
system access. 
TIM METIS-II 
 
4 6 
All these outputs are highly relevant for 5G -
SOLUTIONS and will assist with the definition of a 
functional architecture, the technical specifications, 
the network service interfaces, spectrum 
management, 5G components integration and more. 
Deliver highly reconfigurable HW 
platforms together with SW platforms 
targeting both network elements and 
devices, and considering increased 
capacity and reduced energy footprint. 
TIM 
FLEX5 
WARE 
4 6 
These developments pave the way for effective 
network slicing which is a key component of 5G -
SOLUTIONS. Involved 5G -SOLUTIONS partners 
will ensure the successful knowledge transfer. 
NFVO design; plugin mechanism 
implemented in CBND NFVO products; 
Benchmarking various hardware 
accelerations for NFV use cases. 
Leveraged OPNFV Yardstick to perform 
robust cloud performance tests.  
NOKIA 
SONATA, 
 
 
SUPER-
FLUIDITY  
 
4 6 
Use Cloudband & NFVO and create the necessary 
plugins to orchestrate cross-testbed provisioning and 
management of various vertical applications (VNFs) 
being monitored as part of the KPIs validation. 
Methodologies, technologies and systems 
to conduct testing and validation; Testbed  
and infrastructure for VNF. Development 
of AI -based algorithms to improve the 
security of VNFs; Machine Learning 
components for traffic classification; 
Wide range of networ ks and contacts; 
Network management based on cognitive 
Machine Learning approaches. 
NOKIA, IBM, WIT 
 COGNET  
 
4 6 
Use Machine Learning approaches to analyse 5G KPI 
metrics and process results from data feeds in real -
time; Deploy a testing framework to automate and 
boost reliable validation of network KPIs; Produce 
reports for homogen ised evaluation based on a 
consistent contrast of KPIs with normalised and 
comparable values considering concurrent slices. 
Enforce testing accountability with auditable 
validation reports; Practical application of COGNET 
smart engine in vertical environment. 
Automated Network Service 
Orchestration of multi-domain and multi-
provider Services (compliant with ETSI 
MANO), with fulfilment & assurance 
life-cycle loop s, implemented, deployed 
and tested in a distributed large -scale 
sandbox environment.  5GEx provides 
concepts and mechanisms for Open Co -
operative 5G Service Ecosystems. 
TNOR 5G-EX 
 
4 6 
Leverage multi-party service orchestration 
abstractions and models for further modelling and 
design of the APIs needed by the vertical (tenant) 
enterprise customers.  All main 5G -Ex services 
categories and supporting mechanisms will be 
considered, such as  (i) assu red service quality 
connectivity, NFVI or VNF Slice as a Service, 
including mechanisms for monitoring and SLA 
assurance in multi-actor service contexts. The value-
added connectivity on-demand concepts, are relevant 
for validating the cross-border enhanced user-
experience services. 
5G-PPP Phase 2 
Develop prototype implementations and 
apply these prototypes to representative 
use cases. Use network slicing, which 
capitalises on the capabilities of SDN, 
NFV, orchestration of access network and 
core network functions and analytics, to 
support vertical industries. 
TIM 5G-
MONARCH 
  
5 7 
All these outputs are extremely relevant for 5G 
SOLUTIONS, especially 5G architecture, slicing, use 
of SDN and NFV, which will be used as guidelines 
for the 5G -SOLUTIONS system architecture design 
and the setting-up and execution of the Living Labs. 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  16  
E2E Network slicing schemes 
CTTC 5G-
TRANSFOR
MER 
 
4 6 
The proposed slicing techniques will serve as a base 
for advanced SDN -enabled intra and inter -domain 
slicing schemes for validating the stringent KPIs in 
the Media & Entertainment  Living Lab over 
heterogeneous NFV-based infrastructures. 
An immersive E2E streaming service, 
able to fuse video streaming as 360° in 
AR/VR personal ised content; VNFs: 
Content Management, Aggregator, 
reverse proxy, streaming servers 
CTTC, NURO 
5G-TANGO 
 4 6 
The acquired know-how on streaming service design 
will greatly facilitate the development of the use cases 
in the Media Living Lab. In addition, the VNFs will 
be used in other use cases, such as those in the smart 
cities Living Lab. 
Video contribution and content 
production applications for VNF -based 
environments 
IRT 5G-MEDIA 
 
4 6 
In collaboration with broadcasters, the 5G MEDIA 
results will be leveraged to validate the performance 
of 5G infrastructures for media production and 
contribution scenarios. 
Wide range of networks and contacts 
WIT, TNOR 
To-Euro-5G 
 
- - 
Establish direct links to core contacts within Phase 2 
and Phase 3 of 5G -PPP projects; Increase contacts 
into vertical sectors and in particular, SMEs. 
5G-PPP Phase 3 
5G-EVE facilities 
TIM 5G-EVE 
 
5 7 
Use of the 5G-EVE Turin facility for conducting field 
trials for the use cases related to the Smart Energy 
Living Lab. 
5G-VINNI facilities 
TNOR, UOP 
5G-VINNI 
 
5 7 
Use of the 5G -VINNI facilities for conducting field 
trials for the use cases related to the Factories of the 
Future (Ireland, Brussels, Norway), Smart Cities  
(Ireland), Smart Ports  (Norway) and Media & 
Entertainment Living Labs (Patra and Norway). 
 
 
1.3.4 Methodology 
 
The 5G-SOLUTIONS project will be executed over three contiguous and sequentially aligned  phases of 
development, as listed in Table 1.4. This will allow the project to address the requirement analysis and methodologies 
and prepare in detail the vertical  use case scenarios  and associated target KPIs  (WP1), design and develop the 
necessary interfaces to interwo rk and obtain data from  ICT-17 facilities at orchestration , management and 
infrastructure levels (WP2), design, de velop and integrate the technological enablers, such as the smart KPI 
visualisation system and related APIs (WP3), before validating the use cases of the vertical industries in Living Labs 
(WP4-WP7). Commercialisation, IP management and international netwo rking will be covered in WP8, and 
dissemination, communication, trainings and community-building activities in WP9. 
 
Both the technological as well as the business perspectives will be covered in each use case. 5G connectivity and 
associated management and orchestration will be demonstrated within the set of KPI requirements that arise from 
specific vertical domains. In particular, the Factories of the Future vertical use cases to be demonstrated represent 
Industry 4.0, the Smart Energy, Smart Cities & Ports use cases represent the wide variety of Smart Urban 
Environment, and the Media & Entertainment use cases represent the Enhanced User Experience. Each vertical 
domain with its associated use cases requiring single usage of resources is elaborated in Section 1.3.4.1 and covered 
in relevant Living Labs  (LLs), managed in WP4 -WP6. An additional Multi Living Lab (WP7) will validate 5G 
performance capabilities from the perspective of multi-vertical concurrent usage of resources across all sets of 
heterogeneous KPI requirements so as to prove that no performance degradation occurs. 
 
Table 1.4: Summary of 5G-SOLUTIONS project phases 
Project Phase  Period Description Objectives to attain 
and related WP 
Phase 1 - 
Requirements, 
analysis, 
M1-M6 Phase 1 is concerned with methods for validating the 5G KPIs , 
including the detailed analysis of the use cases and 
corresponding KPIs for each LL, challenges for multi and cross-
domain service orchestration across multiple 5G  ICT-17 
Linked primarily to 
Objective 1, as well 
as to the 
specifications and 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  17  
methodologies 
and design 
facilities, methodologies for the tests, benchmarking of results, 
technological/business validation, and extending previous work 
from funded 5G PPP Phase 1 and 2 projects. Design of 
interfaces, APIs and the smart KPI visualisation system.  Apart 
from the initial Phase 1, whose work has already started and 
incorporated into the concept, the analysis and design will be 
extended until M 26 to ensure that any new requirements that 
may arise as a result of the validation Phase 3, will be 
implemented as improvements in subsequent testing cycles.     
design of Objective 
2.  
Linked to WP1, WP2 
and WP3. 
Phase 1 gate: Requirements & analysis, methodologies specified and design ready (M6), related to MS1 
Phase 2 - 
Development & 
Integration  
M7-M12 Development of the 5G -SOLUTIONS smart KPI visualisation 
system, including external integration interfaces and APIs, 
CDSO plugins and dry run testing to verify the correct 
communication with the 5G-EVE & 5G-VINNI facilities. 
Linked to Objective 
2 and WP2-WP3. 
Phase 2 gate: Readiness of the 5G ecosystem to conduct Living Lab trials (M12), related to MS2 
Phase 3 – 
Validation, 
demonstration & 
impact 
maximisation 
M13-M36 The final phase is concerned with the iterative execution of 20 
use cases in LLs over 3 consequential and iterative cycles of 
testing, at least once per 3GPP release. Iteration is necessary to 
ensure that potential feedback improvements are applied to all 
solution components thus enabling regression testing to ensure 
baseline target KPIs are met. Results from Cycle 1 in LLs (M13-
M18, 3GPP Rel.15) will be fed back to WP1, WP2 & WP3 for 
potential improvements. Regression testing will be performed in 
Cycle 2 (M21-M26 for 3GPP Rel.16) and Cycle 3 (M29-M34 
for 3GPP Rel. 17 if available by summer 2021) for verification 
of improvements in KPIs based on the developed methodologies 
in WP1. This phase also includes dissemination , innovation , 
commercialisation, capacity building and data management 
activities in WP8 and WP9. 
Linked to Objectives 
3-6 and WP4-WP9. 
Phase 3 gate: Project completion (M36), related to milestone MS6 
 
 
 
Figure 1.7: 5G-SOLUTIONS Living Labs – Integrated deployment and evaluation approach 
 
Continuous improvements will be achieved through feedback from LL operation, providing the basis for information 
sharing, operation, learning and improvement, as shown pictorially in Figure 1.7 .  The design and implementation 
activities in 5G-SOLUTIONS will be driven by the Co-operative Inquiry Methodology15. This is a type of research-
action methodology focused on performing research with users rather than on users. Co-operative Inquiry is based 
on the principals of focused workshops (i.e. Living Labs) that engage researchers and users (‘co-researchers’) in the 
development of a framework of inquiry and the exploration of their experiences and impressions of a research topic. 
5G-SOLUTIONS ultimately aims to validate and affirm reference industry 5G KPIs in innovative use cases, thus 
advancing the frontiers of 5G te chnology and bringing them one step closer to commercial deployment and 
exploitation. 
                                                 
15 J Heron, P Reason , The practice of co -operative inquiry: Research 'with' rather than 'on' people , Handbook of action research, 2006, 
http://www.peterreason.eu/Papers/Handbook_Co-operative_Inquiry.pdf  
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  18  
1.3.4.1 Implementation of the technological and business validation through Living Labs (LLs) 
The purpose of the Livi ng Labs is to validate the capabilities of both the 5G technology and the Use Cases 
(UCs) of the vertical industries so as to enable their commercial exploitation . During the projects’ conception 
phase, 5G-SOLUTIONS performed a stakeholder’s preliminary ris k-analysis for the LLs, an d generate d the 
descriptions for the identified and prioritised use cases. As such, verifying the key target 5G KPIs in the content of 
those industry segments is expected to motivate a very high business and economic impact (see section 2.1). During 
the pr oject, each LL will deploy a layered testing practice to drive development, involving significant industry 
representative tests, verifications and validations: (i) tests using specific use cases oriented for dedicated single or 
multi-concurrent vertical industries, and (ii) test, measurements, validation and demonstration of LLs in the field.  
 
Technological Use Case validation 
Table 1.5 provides an overview of the UC  field trials and their class type as per ITU M2083 , a mapping to the 
corresponding ICT-17 facilities locations in which each UC field trial will be conducted, as well as the ultimate end 
users of each UC. During proposal elaboration, a gap analysis has been conducted to identify any additional remote 
5G RAN (gNB and/or MEC) and other infrastructure relevant equipment required to be installed within each field 
trial location as an extension to 5G-VINNI facilities. Annex 2B in Section 5 provides a description of the services to 
be provided by 5G-VINNI. In particular, 5 new 5G RAN nodes will be installed in total as follows:  
▪ Two new 5G RAN nodes by UOP acting as 5G private networks to validate the stringent URLLC UC 
requirements within two factory locations, one in Ireland (GLAN) and the other in Brussels (PGBS); 
▪ One new 5G RAN node by UOP in IBM’s campus premises in Dublin-Ireland, whose traffic will be backhauled 
to 5G-VINNI Patra ICT-17 facility.  
▪ Two new 5G RAN nodes by TNOR in NTNU at Trondheim and YARA premises at Herøya Norway, whose 
traffic will be backhauled to 5G-VINNI Norway facility. Furthermore, the intention of TNOR is to enable 2 
additional 5G RAN nodes for free (i.e. at no additional cost to the project) in locations in Norway. 
Budget has been assigned to both TNOR and UOP  partners for the provision of such extension 5G RAN 
infrastructure, as outlined in the ‘other direct costs’ Table 3.4b in Section 3.4. 
 
Table 1.5: Overview of field trials including their physical location and connection to ICT-17 testbeds 
UC 
# UC title Class 
Type 
Main 
participants UC location 
ICT-17 facility to 
connect to/ additional 
local RAN equipment 
Indicative 
ultimate  
end-users 
LL1: Factories of the Future (FoF)
1.1 
Time-critical process 
optimisation inside 
digital factories 
eMBB+ 
URLLC+ 
mMTC 
PGBS, GLAN, 
IRIS, OMES, 
NTNU 
Brussels-Belgium, 
Ireland 
Trondheim-Norway 
One 5G private node 
will be installed within 
GLAN factory in Ireland 
and another within 
PBGS factory in 
Brussels, both provided 
by UOP, plus a new 5G 
RAN node by TNOR 
connected to 5G-VINNI 
Norway facility 
Manufacturing 
plants, 
production line 
factories with 
automation 
machinery 
and/or robots
1.2 
Non-time-critical 
communication inside 
factories 
mMTC 
PGBS, GLAN, 
IRIS, OMES, 
NTNU 
Brussels-Belgium, 
Ireland 
Trondheim-Norway
1.3 Remotely controlling 
digital factories 
eMBB+ 
URLLC  
PGBS, IRIS, 
NTNU 
Brussels-Belgium 
Trondheim-Norway
1.4 Connected goods URLLC PGBS, IRIS Brussels-Belgium
1.5 
Rapid deployment, 
auto/re-configuration, 
testing of new robots 
eMBB + 
URLLC+ 
mMTC 
NTNU, TNOR, 
YARA Trondheim-Norway 
New 5G RAN node by 
TNOR connected to 5G-
VINNI Norway facility 
LL2: Smart Energy
2.1 Industrial Demand 
Side Management  URLLC ENEL, IREN Turin-Italy 5G-EVE, Turin facility 
Residential and 
commercial 
users
2.2 Electrical Vehicle 
(EV) Smart Charging  URLLC ENEL, IREN Rome & Turin-Italy 5G RAN Rome part of 
5G-EVE, Turin facility Owners of EV 
fleets, EV 
drivers 2.3 Electricity network 
frequency stability URLLC ENEL, IREN Rome-Italy 5G RAN Rome part of 
5G-EVE, Turin facility 
LL3: Smart Cities & Ports  
Smart Cities
3.1 Intelligent Street 
Lighting mMTC NURO, TNOR Norway 5G-VINNI Norway site Municipalities, 
local authorities
3.2 Smart Parking mMTC NURO, TNOR Trondheim-Norway 
New 5G RAN node by 
TNOR connected to 5G-
VINNI Norway facility 
Municipalities, 
companies, 
consumers 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  19
3.3 Smart city co-creation mMTC, 
eMBB 
NTNU SSC16, 
TNOR Trondheim-Norway 
New 5G RAN node by 
TNOR connected to 5G-
VINNI Norway facility 
Municipalities, 
companies, 
households
3.4 Smart buildings / 
Smart campus 
eMBB+ 
URLLC+ 
mMTC 
IBM Dublin-Ireland 
New 5G RAN node by 
UOP connected to 5G-
VINNI Patra facility  
Universities, 
enterprises, 
households 
Smart Ports
3.5 
Autonomous assets 
and logistics for smart 
harbour/port eMBB+ 
URLLC+ 
mMTC 
TNOR, YARA, 
NTNU Herøya-Norway New 5G RAN node by 
TNOR connected to 5G-
VINNI Norway facility 
Port authorities, 
logistics 
companies
3.6 
Port Safety: monitor 
& detect irregular 
sounds 
NURO, TNOR  Herøya-Norway Port authorities 
LL4: Media & Entertainment
4.1 Ultra High-Fidelity 
Media 
eMBB+ 
mMTC 
CTTC, FNET 
IRT, UOP Patra-Greece 5G-VINNI Patra facility Consumers, 
prosumers
4.2 Multi CDN selection eMBB CTTC, IRT, 
UOP Patra-Greece 5G-VINNI Patra facility Consumers, 
content 
providers, 
educators, 
broadcasters
4.3 On-site Live Event 
Experience 
eMBB+ 
mMTC  
CTTC, LIVEU, 
UOP, TNOR 
Patra-Greece 
Norway 
5G-VINNI Patra and 
Norway facilities
4.4 User & Machine 
Generated Content 
eMBB + 
mMTC 
FNET, LIVEU, 
UOP, CTTC Patra-Greece 5G-VINNI Patra facility
4.5 
Immersive and 
Integrated Media and 
Gaming 
eMBB + 
URLLC+ 
mMTC 
CTTC, NURO, 
UOP Patra-Greece 5G-VINNI Patra facility 
Online gamers, 
commercial 
consumers
4.6 Cooperative Media 
Production 
eMBB+ 
mMTC   
CTTC, FNET, 
LIVEU, UOP Patra-Greece 5G-VINNI Patra facility Media 
production users 
 
Table 1.6 provides an overview of the LLs and indicative target technological KPI values to be validated in each 
of their use cases. These target KPI  values have been obtained from previous experimental test trials of 5G -PPP 
Phase 1 and 2, from various 5G-related white papers (e.g. 5G-PPP17), technical journals18, standardisation bodies 
(e.g. ETSI 3GPP19, NMGN20, ITU21) as well as from the consortium members’ expertise and experiences. 
 
Table 1.6: Overview of indicative target technological KPIs to be tested and validated in the Living Labs 
Field Trials 
Cluster 
Living Lab 
title 
  Technological KPIs 
UC # 
Data Rate 
(Mbps) 
Mobility 
(km/h) 
Latency (ms) 
Connection 
Density 
(devices/m2) 
Reliability 
(%) 
Positioning 
Accuracy (m) 
Coverage 
(%) 
Device 
Autonomy 
QoE (MOS) 
(a) Industry
4.0  
LL1: Factories 
of the Future 
1.1 >100 <10 <5 >0.1 >99.999 <0.5 >99 - - 
1.2 >10 <10  <100  >0.1 >99.99 <0.5 >99 >30 - 
1.3 >500 <10  <5 >10-2  >99.99 <0.5 >99 - - 
1.4 >10 >30  <10  >10-4 >95 <10  >99.9 >30 - 
1.5 >100 <50 <1 >1 >99.999 <0.1 >99.9 >30 - 
(b) Smart 
urban 
environment  
LL2: Smart 
Energy 
2.1 - - <10 >10-2 >99.999 - >99.9 - - 
2.2 - - <10 >10-2 >99.999 - >99.9 - - 
2.3 - - <10 >10-2 >99.999 - >99.9 - - 
LL3: Smart 
Cities & Ports 
3.1 - - <100 >1 >99 - >99 - - 
3.2 - <100 <100 >0.1 >95 <10 >95 - - 
                                                 
16 NTNU Sustainable Smart City (SSC) is another department within NTNU that does not participate in the 5G-SOLUTIONS consortium. Use 
Case 3.3 will be executed in cooperation with NTNU SSC. See Use Case 3.3 description and Letter of Support in Annex 2 Section 4. 
17 https://5g-ppp.eu/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/Euro-5G-D2.6_Final-report-on-programme-progress-and-KPIs.pdf  
18 https://www.nttdocomo.co.jp/english/binary/pdf/corporate/technology/rd/technical_journal/bn/vol19_3/vol19_3_003en.pdf  
19 https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_tr/138900_138999/138913/14.02.00_60/tr_138913v140200p.pdf  
20 https://www.ngmn.org/fileadmin/ngmn/content/downloads/Technical/2015/NGMN_5G_White_Paper_V1_0.pdf  
21 https://www.itu.int/rec/R-REC-M.2083  
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  20  
3.3 >10 <50 <10 >1 >99.99 <1 >95 - - 
3.4 >100 - <10 >1 >99.99 <1 >99.9 - - 
3.5 >100 <50 <10 >1 >99.99 <0.5 >99.9 - - 
3.6 >100 <10 <10 >0.1 >99.99 <10 >99.9 - - 
(c) 
Enhanced 
User 
Experience  
LL4: Media & 
Entertainment 
4.1 <1000 <100 <100 >1 >99.99 <10 >99.9 - >4.3 
4.2 >100 <1 <50 >10-2 >99 <10 >99 - >4.3 
4.3 <1000 <1 <50 >1 >99 <10 >95 - >4.3 
4.4 >100 <100 <100 >1 >95 <10 >99.9 - >4.3 
4.5 <200 <1 <10 >0.1 >99 <10 >99 - >4.3 
4.6 <1000 <100 <50 >0.1 >99.99 <10 >95 - >4.3 
 
As one of the key targets of 5G-SOLUTIONS is the validation of KPIs for end users and services, the project will 
also combine QoS (Quality of Service) indicators, which are used for measuring the service quality perceived by 
users for the emerging communication services , as well as Quality of Expe rience (QoE22), which is a direct 
measurement of human perception of the quality of communication services,  and in particular media and 
entertainment, resulting to a more promising and beneficial approach for future communication systems performance 
evaluation. The Mean Opinion Score (MOS) is a widely used indicator for assessing the quality of multimedia signals 
based on end user subjective expectations on a scale from 1 -5 (1 bad to 5 excellent). MOS audiovisual tests will be 
carried out according to ITU-T P.911, ITU-T P913, ITU-T P.920 and ITU-T P.1301 specifications to provide results 
in terms of MOS-AVQS23.  
 
Business Use Case (UC) and business model validation 
Business UC validation is an early step in the process of  business portfolio development. Therefore, the business 
potential of each UC will be validated directly by the end -user actors to ensure that each of the use cases to b e 
trialed is well-positioned to respond to the needs of the market. 
 
The business UC validation will use the lean start-up methodology that centres around the main motivations of a 
business. The inputs of the business UC validation include apart from the business case itself, end-user feedback 
from the UC research in the field trials. The corresponding outputs are validations that will allow the business UCs 
to progress to the next step of creating a service pro duct portfolio. The 5G-SOLUTIONS commercialisation team 
will assess the business potential of each UC based on their needs as well as from questionnaires, surveys and 
focused group workshops directly engaging the customers of the vertical consortium partners. The aim would 
be to validate whether or not the UC will accomplish its goals within each business case , considering relevant 
business model variants. To achieve these goals, the following will be considered:  
- Research on the business potential of each UC: this will help increase the existing customer knowledge for the 
potential of the product. 
- Competitive analysis: review competing solutions, including preferred business model, within the marketplace 
to evaluate if this would affect the investments and returns included in the business case. 
- Internal market research validation : conduct reviews comparing previously performed market research with 
additional analysis against published sources and initial prospects for customer adoption. This effort will ensure 
that the service has a targeted market, that the market is searching and waiting for such as a service, and that the 
service can serve or alleviate existing problems that prospective customers currently experience. 
- Feedback arriving directly from end-users: failing to reach outside the organisation to prospective customers 
may cause misinformation to research findings. Therefore, to avoid over -generalisation of the customer base, 
feedback will be received from prospective customers of each vertical end-user organisation participating in the 
LLs throu gh focused surveys and questionnaires. Such feedback will be analysed to provide key customer 
insights and help improve the service offering making it appealing to the market.   
 
An indicative set of  metric parameters considered for the business validation  of each UC are listed in Table 1. 7a. 
These metrics will be interrogated (as listed in Table 1.7b) and quantified as part of the business validation process 
with the end-users. The proposed spectrum of metric parameters embraces all the use cases.  
 
 
 
 
                                                 
22 QoE is defined by ITU-T as “the overall acceptability of an application or service, as perceived subjectively by the end user”. 
23 https://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-P.800.1-201607-I  
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  21  
Table 1.7a: 5G-SOLUTIONS metric parameters for use case business validation 
LL Use Case 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
See Table 1.7b for B1-B6 
1. Factories of 
the Future 
1.1: Time-critical process optimisation inside digital factory ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫   
1.2: Non-time-critical communication inside factory ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫   
1.3: Remotely controlling digital factories ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ 
1.4: Connected goods  ⚫ ⚫ ⚫   ⚫ 
1.5: Rapid deployment, auto/re-configuration, testing of new robots ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫  
2. Smart 
Energy 
2.1: Industrial Demand Side Management ⚫ ⚫ ⚫   ⚫ 
2.2: Electrical Vehicle Smart Charging   ⚫    ⚫ 
2.3: Electricity network frequency stability  ⚫    ⚫ 
3. Smart 
Cities & Ports 
3.1: Intelligent street lighting   ⚫  ⚫  ⚫ 
3.2: Smart parking  ⚫  ⚫  ⚫ 
3.3: Smart city co-creation  ⚫   ⚫ ⚫
3.4: Smart buildings – Smart Campus  ⚫   ⚫ ⚫
3.5: Autonomous assets and logistics for smart harbour/port  ⚫  ⚫  ⚫
3.6: Port Safety: monitor & detect irregular noise ⚫ ⚫  ⚫  
4. Media & 
Entertainment 
4.1: Ultra High-Fidelity Media;  ⚫ ⚫ ⚫  ⚫ ⚫ 
4.2: Multi CDN selection;  ⚫ ⚫ ⚫   ⚫ 
4.3: On-site Live Event Experience;  ⚫ ⚫ ⚫   ⚫ 
4.4: User & Machine Generated Content; ⚫ ⚫ ⚫  ⚫  
4.5: Immersive and Integrated Media and Gaming; ⚫ ⚫ ⚫  ⚫  
4.6: Cooperative Media Production. ⚫ ⚫ ⚫  ⚫ ⚫ 
 
Table 1.7b: Indicative metric parameters to be interrogated and quantified as part of the business validation process 
Metric parameter  
B1: Personnel cost 
People are the biggest cost in most enterprises, therefore, with these services can we do more 
with same resources ? can we do more with less resources ? are more expensive resources 
required? which are more specialised and hard to find? 
B2: Overhead cost How can the new service reduce non -people costs? energy costs? green:  reduce CO2? less 
infrastructure, less buildings, less transport?  
B3: Time to market 
How does 5G accelerate the provision of new innovative services to customers / citizens and 
which of them are critical for business (compe titive differentiation) and for public services 
(deliver return-on-taxes to citizens)? 
B4: Safety How does 5G improve confidence in technology acceleration  with respect to  safety of the 
people, safety of the processes, safety of the ecosystem? 
B5: Data privacy How does 5G improve confidence in protection of the individual in the digital age of their 
data and their identify? 
B6: Accessibility How does 5G help a wider community to share in the benefits of an enhanced digital age: 
more accessible in cost? types of location? device types? disabilities? 
 
In addition to the above, the following three 5G -PPP contractual KPIs 24 related to business aspects will also be 
validated, as required by the ICT-19-2019 call, and measured as stated in the following table: 
▪ BA1: Leverage the effect of EU R&I funding in terms of private investment in R&D for 5G systems in the order 
of 5-10 times in turn evidencing a 5-10-fold increase in private funding relative to EU funding; 
▪ BA2: Target SME participation under this initiative commensurate with an allocation of 20% of the total public 
funding in turn evidencing a minimum of 20% of public funding dedicated to the SME sector; 
▪ BA3: Reach a global market share for 5G equipment & services delivered by European headquartered ICT 
companies at, or above, the reported 2011 level of 43% global market share in communication infrastructure. 
 
KPI  How to achieve the validation of the 5G-PPP contractual business KPIs 
BA1 This KPI will be measured and monitored by gathering the published public figures from annual reports for 
worldwide R&D investment in the ICT sector, and subsequently discerning the proportion of the R&D ICT 
expenditure related to 5G. The substantiation of  this value will benefit from a poll/questionnaire amongst 
industry stakeholders, such as 5G network vendors, mobile network operators, and UE manufacturers. 
Investment in 5G, with respect to the total telecom R&D budget, will gradually increase with time as 5G 
                                                 
24 https://5g-ppp.eu/contract/  
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  22  
moves into full standardisation, development and production over the next 2-3 years. In order to identify an 
investment value specific for Europe, the poll/questionnaire will be sent to a representative set of key 5G 
EU stakeholders (e.g. stakeholders from 5G-PPP projects incl. 5G-SOLUTIONS consortium partners).  
BA2 This KPI will be measured by taking into consideration the budget allocated to SMEs from their 
participation in all 5G-PPP projects with respect to the total funded budget. 
BA3 The project will span over 3 years and it is estimated to be completed by the summer 2022, at which stage 
there will be representative data to enable its validation. These measurements will again be taken from a 
poll/questionnaire amongst the same industry stakeholders as in BA1. 
 
The business aspect of each of the UCs stated in the Living Labs will be validated according to the business UC and 
business model validation methodology developed in task T1.5 and the corresponding business metric parameters 
assessment to be quantified in each Living Lab. 
 
 
Living Lab 1: Factories of the Future (FoF) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 
Factory digitisation will be a pivotal goal for 2020 and Industry 4.0 initiatives have been driving the emergence of 
new manufacturing scenarios based on increased sensing, as well as the collaborative functions of a new generation 
of robots or ‘cobots’ , with the ultimate goal of increasing the efficiency of factory production lines. We are also 
seeing an evolution towards data-driven ecosystems by exploiting product lifecycle data from connected goods , 
whereby diverse data collection scenarios will be supported by energy eﬃcient communication schemes and scalable 
data analytics. Regarding Augmented Reality (AR), we are seeing the rise of new remote services that facilitate 
eﬀective knowledge sharing in the factory. It is envisaged that future communication solutions can ensure seamless, 
real-time and secure connectivity between different globally distributed 
production sites and new actors in the value chain (e.g. suppliers, 
logistics). Innovative strategies and their design principles are gaining 
increasing acceptance and will inﬂuence on present and future 5G 
requirements25.  
The main use cases identiﬁed in the context of the Factor ies of the 
Future25 LL are as follows:  
Use Case 1.1: Time-critical process optimisation inside digital factories  
Use Case 1.2: Non-time-critical communication inside factories  
Use Case 1.3: Remotely controlling digital factories 
Use Case 1.4: Connected goods 
Use Case 1.5: Rapid deployment, auto/re-configuration and testing of 
new robots 
 
Context – Business Situation & Drivers 
The manufacturing sector in the EU account s for 2 million companies that employ 33 million people. The sector 
contributes 15% of the EU’s GDP26, and given the manufacturing sector’s great potential for growth and job creation, 
the EU has set itself the target of increasing th is contribution to GDP to 20% by 2020 25. However, in contrast with 
this ambition, global transitions, such as declining energy prices, diminishing re sources, new competition from 
emerging markets and an aging workforce, have diminished its growth and have seen the share of industry in GDP 
terms decline in recent years27. In response to this decline, rejuvenation of the existing manufacturing sector is a key 
European agenda for encouraging industrial growth in an effective, efficient, and sustainable manner 27. Indeed, the 
4th Industrial Revolution has started, which is fuelled by cyber-physical-systems and IoT technology, to realize highly 
efficient, connected and flexible Factories of the Future (FoF).   
 
Solution – Technology Perspective 
To enable the execution of representa tive FoF use cases, t he approach will involve both horizontal and vertical 
slicing. On the one hand,  horizontal slicing involves computational off-loading, e.g. multi-access edge computing, 
and addresses the diverse network capacity  and latency requirements e.g. 10,000x capacity at the edge with <1ms 
latencies (“factory floor”), compared to core network, due to the huge numbers of sensors, other networked devices 
and time-critical applications. It requires over-the-air resource sharing across network nodes, and as such the 5G air 
interface will be an appropriate enabler. As indicated in Table 1.5, portable 5G RAN nodes will be installed inside 
each of the factory premises of GLAN (Ireland) and PBGS (Brussels), as well as in NTNU (Norway), the first two 
acting as stand-alone private 5G networks for validating the relevant field trials requiring URLLC class service type. 
                                                 
25 White Paper: 5G and the Factories of the Future. Available from: https://5g-ppp.eu/wp-content/uploads/2014/02/5G-PPP-White-Paper-on-
Factories-of-the-Future-Vertical-Sector.pdf  
26https://ec.europa.eu/commission/commissioners/2014-2019/oettinger/announcements/speech-hannover-messe-europes-future-digital_en   
27 Future of Manufacturing in Europe. Frost and Sullivan, 2016.  
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  23  
This will ensure that the results obtained during the validation of this use case will be as realistic as possible and that 
the URLLC requirements can be met. For vertical slicing, on the other hand, which entails separate virtual networks 
within the 5G network, technologies at the air interface, RAN and NGC levels will be setup and configured. At the 
RAN level (i.e. at base s tation) access point and depending on factors such as traffic type, traffic load and QoS 
requirement, the RAN architecture of each of the slices can be dynamically configured. The  5G node will allocate 
radio resources for the slice and enable all radio and network functions associated with the slice.  
 
Main Participants and their role:  
Part Role  
IRIS 
LL leader. Provide support to all factory sites in the UCs in terms of organisation, planning, and set up of the 
core communication network platforms at each site for optimising the existing communication network as 
appropriate, and building the interfaces between transceivers and sensors for wireless communication.  IRIS 
will also leverage its expertise in Process Analytical Technology solutio ns for real-time process monitoring 
and control within UC1.1 in PBGS, whereby its Hyper-Spectral Imaging (HSI) system will be integrated to a 
Global Control System Platform (PATBox) for processing the data obtained from the analysers, and using the 
5G nodes as the communication interface with the cloud. Cloud-based supercomputing will be used to enable 
updated machine learning algorithms to be used for improving the current capabilities, which are 
predominantly based on chemometric tools.  
GLAN 
Participation in UC1.1, based on the maintenance function within  GLAN in their dairy and nutritional 
ingredients processing factory plant. Typically, key assets and equipment have been maintained using 
scheduled and usage-based maintenance strategies. Predictive maintenance uses key data feeds and agents to 
constantly monitor condition feeds and recognise patterns leading to equipment failure allowing for timely 
and effective intervention. The key benefit is that assets can be sweated for longer and avoid u nplanned 
outages. GLAN will also participate in UC1.3, whereby an AR module will be developed by  OMES, which 
displays a GLAN powder plant with current status. The AR module will use Microsoft HoloLens and display 
plant operations using a 5G gateway data collection UE. 
NTNU 
YARA In collaboration with TNOR, the NTNU Manulab Robotics and Industry 4.0 laboratories will be equipped 
with a 5G infrastructure for ultra -low latency closed -loop control of moving and stationary robots. In 
particular, NTNU will be involved in UC1.1, UC1.2, UC1.3 and primarily in UC1.5, which will monitor new 
robots in a factory for remote operation by real-time audio/video-feeds requiring high data rates. YARA will 
support NTNU in the execution of the field trials in UC1.5. 
PBGS 
PBGS will participate in UC1.1, to enable full automation of a digital plant, leveraging advanced technology, 
such as visual recognition of quality control on, for instance, bottles on a line, and hyperspectral imaging of 
complex products and vision systems on advanced robotics. The data needs to be collected and optimi sed 
across plants. For UC1.2, in view of the large number of products and complex supply chains fro m the 
production plants to distribution and warehousing, there is a high need for tracking of materials (e.g. spare 
parts) and tracking of product stocks. While the tracking of product is currently done with low -bandwidth 
devices, and since the Distribution Centres (DCs) of the future depend fully on fast wireless data transfer, 5G 
opens up new opportunities to expand the required scope with UHD+ cameras and HSI technology, to track 
stock in large DCs, requiring large data transfer without latency, which ca n be piloted at  PBGS’s facilities. 
For UC1.3 related to next generation plant planning/scheduling to greatly increase plant productivity by better 
utilisation of the assets, 5G will enable  PBGS to bring this to the next level across sites and with new 
algorithms for dynamic, reactive scheduling. For UC1.4 home services will be validated for laundry that 
require connected machines to continuously track and anticipate consumer laundry (imaging & spectral data). 
OMES 
For UC1.1, OMES with its client GLAN will enhance the operation of their Smart Manufacturing Execution 
Systems & Performance Management Systems, whereby the OPS Smart Manufacturing datahub  – a 
centralised Hub for connectivity & data storage (for data input and extraction from various devices across the 
plant) – will be used for 5G validation to ensure efficiency, speed, capacity, latency, reliability, accuracy and 
timeliness in data input. Efficiency, Intelligence and Data Analysis within the FoF is dependent on the future-
proofing of communications to this Hub via 5G. For UC1.3, OMES will develop an AR module of a GLAN 
powder plant to validate key KPIs through the testing of multiple business scenarios within the plant.  
TNOR 
UOP UOP will support the execution of field trials in UC1.1 -UC1.4 by installing private 5G nodes in PBGS and 
GLAN factories. 
TNOR will support the execution of field trials in UC1.5 through the 5G-VINNI Norway 5G facility. 
 
Use Case (UC) 1.1: Time-critical process optimisation inside digital factories 
The drive for instant optimisation to increase production line efficiency is seeing increased real-time monitoring of 
the performance of sub-components, the measured quality variations of produced goods, the interactions by operators 
and changing factors in the environment. This involves the use of sensors, some of which  communicate at low bit 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  24  
rates but with ultra-low latency and ultra-high reliability, and also vision-controlled robot arms or mobile robots that 
can require reliable high-bandwidth communication. Beyond machine-type communications, we are also seeing the 
emergence of new scenarios for time-critical communication incorporating the collaborative functions offered by a 
new generation of robots, the introduction of wearables on the shop floor, and augmented reality. More and more 
devices are becoming wireless and mobile, thereby requiring the transfer of “heavy” data (3D models, large historic 
data sets, etc.) for fast intervention, maintenance or assembly tasks. Significant volumes of information need to be 
shared and utilised for on-the-spot collaborative decision making. Robots and operators are collaborating in real-
time, with the robot adapting to operators’ faculties when interacting with the operator’s wearables, the surrounding 
sensors and the machine control systems. Greater levels of automation will be facilitated with u ncaged robots, 
augmenting the efficiency of operator tasks, increasing production yield, quality output and overall operator safety. 
While ISO 10218 standard already defines robotic collaborative operation, 5G can play a differentiating role  in the 
case of ultra-fast and ultra-reliable access to moving objects. Adapt instantaneously variable capacity and mobility 
needs to changing environments , will require flexible convergent and seamless connectivity offer across different 
radio access technologies22.  
 
Test Objectives Requirements  Key Actors 
▪ To test the stringent requirements for indoor 
mission–critical process optimi sations in a 
heterogeneous environment. 
▪ To test ultra-low latencies (<1ms) in densities of 
up to 1 transceiver/sensor per m2 
▪ To test the network ’s reliability of at least 
99.999% 
▪ To test the positioning accuracy of less than 0.5m 
▪ To test the performance during the mobility of 
goods up to 100km/h 
▪ Complementary communication 
channels for accessing remote services 
based on high speed broadband 
connection  
▪ Real data and the respective data sources  
▪ Installation of private 5G RAN nodes in 
PBGS & GLAN factories 
▪ Installation of a private 5G node from 
TNOR within NTNU Manulab/Industry 
4.0 facilities 
▪ IRIS 
▪ GLAN 
▪ OMES 
▪ NTNU 
▪ PGBS 
 
 
 
Use Case 1.2: Non-time-critical communication inside factories 
While in UC1.1 the involved machines and robots are part of closed time critical control loops, UC1.2 relates to less 
time-critical communications that involve the locali sation of assets and goods in on -site production and logistic 
processes, non-time critical quality control, or data capturing for later usage in virtual design contexts. Similarly, the 
communication with operators on the shop floor may not always require ultra -low latencies, given that human 
response times are much higher compared to machine -level respon se times. Concerning logistics, accurate 
localisation of forklifts, vessels, trolleys, auto guided vehicles etc., can significantly decrease error rates in picking 
and packaging, by validating the source and destinations of picked goods or parts in real ti me with intelligent 
warehouse management systems (WMS). Successful capture of sensor data on the shop floor is another use case that 
requires less time critical communication inside the factory, buy which is crucial for fuelling further digitisation of 
the factory, and for facilitate virtualised design processes that integrate simulator data with real -life, data sensed 
during production. The successful combination of these data, will contribute to minimising product lead times and to 
the design of superior products that can be produced with a minimal number of defects. Guaranteeing the full 
availability and reliability of future automated industry applications will be reliant on indoor coverage enabling the 
connectivity of complete locations (e.g. including all floors, all rooms, etc.)25.  
 
Test Objectives Requirements  Key Actors 
▪ To test inside the factory, the coverage, 
coexistence and interference 
management of 5G wireless 
technologies, such as 3G, 4G Wi -Fi, 
Bluetooth. 
▪ To test the reliability (99. 99%) of the 
wireless data transfer between e.g. 
forklift drivers and WMS. 
▪ Complementary communication channels for 
accessing remote services based on high 
speed links.  
▪ Real data and respective data sources (both 
fixed or mobile)  
▪ Installation of private 5G RAN in PBGS 
▪ Installation of a private 5G node within 
NTNU Manulab/Industry 4.0 facilities 
▪ IRIS 
▪ NTNU 
▪ PGBS 
 
 
 
Use Case 1.3: Remotely controlling digital factories 
While in both UC1.1 and UC1.2, local on-site communication is assumed within the plant, in the case of UC3.3, the 
public wireless access network also plays a role in the E2E communication between remote workers and the factory. 
The simplest setup of this use case involves remote control applications running on tablets or smart phones  for 
example. However, in view of the trend of new AR devices, it is likely that new remote services may arise that 
facilitate the creation of virtual back office teams. Such remote teams may use the data coming from smart devices 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  25  
for preventive analytics and easy access to work instructions, whereby, e.g. they would be able to view the camera 
or iPad/Google Glass of a local worker. Additionally, the application of AR in the plant will facilitate:  
▪ Augmented-reality support in production and assembly: Precisely positioned picture-in picture fade-ins, showing 
the operator the next step and helping to avoid misplacement and unnecessary scrap.  
▪ Augmented-reality support in maintena nce and repair : Repair machines without training due to augmented 
information and operational guidance.  
Cross-functional communication, effective knowledge sharing and collaborative design platforms will be facilitated 
by solutions for communities of practice . In this use case family, there is a less stringent need for low -latency. 
Interaction times up to seconds are acceptable for remote servicing machines. However, high availability is key for 
allowing (emergency) maintenance actions to occur immediately. Bandwidth is important for video-controlled 
maintenance, with real -time augmented content mixed into the video signal. Moreover, latency is particularly 
important for real-time, remote motion control of local robots. Edge computing wit hin the network is  required for 
fulfilling the low latency requirements. Security threats are introduced due to the opening up of the machines to allow 
remote reconfiguration. As such, the cyber-representation of a factory or supply chain needs to be prote cted, with 
mission-critical actions being shielded from non-authorised parties. 
 
Test Objectives Requirements  Key Actors 
▪ To test the availability/ coverage 
of the network for immediate use 
▪ To test the security of the 
network to protect against non-
authorised access and malicious 
takeover of a machine or a plant 
▪ Installation of private 5G RAN nodes within the 
factories to support the measurement of availability, 
latency, throughput and positioning accuracy.  
▪ Complementary communication channels for accessing 
remote services based on high speed wideband. 
▪ Real data and respective data sources (fixed or mobile) 
▪ IRIS 
▪ GLAN 
▪ OMES 
▪ NTNU 
▪ PGBS 
 
Use Case 1.4: Connected goods  
The consolidation of physical goods will be of strategic importance to the manufacturing industry. Product lifecycle 
data, combined with personalised usage and context data is extensive required and exploited by business models in 
the manufacturing industry. Reinforcing this product-service relationship will become increasingly important in the 
production of connected goods, and will see manufacturing plants evolve to a data -driven eco-system. Ultimately 
this will augment production-related data with usage-related data collected during their lifetime. To boost such data 
collection scenarios, reliable and cost-effective communication is also required. Smart data filtering and scalable data 
analytics will fuel a new way of data -driven, computer-aided design. Device autonomy is a key requirement  for 
realising the true potential of connected goods, and as such, n ew low-power, low-cost, long-range communication 
technologies need to be integrated within the factory communication network28. 
 
Test Objectives Requirements  Key Actors 
▪ To test the minimal energy 
consumption for ultra-high 
autonomy  
▪ To test the coverage, coexistence 
and interference management of 
5G wireless technologies, such as 
3G, 4G Wi-Fi, Bluetooth. 
▪ 3rd party high speed communication channels such 
as optical fibres and satellite 
▪ Real traffic and relative applications of exploiting 
product lifetime data from connected goods “living” 
in the wide area network. 
▪ Installation of private 5G RAN nodes within PBGS 
factory 
▪ IRIS 
▪ PGBS 
 
Use Case 1.5: Rapid deployment, auto/re-configuration and testing of new robots 
While in UC1.1, UC1.2 and UC1.3 the RAN properties of the 5G communication are being tested and evaluated in 
various settings and with different requirements, UC1.5 focuses on the possibilities of utilising the core 
functionalities of 5G in order to achieve one major feature of the Industry 4.0 in the FoF, such as significantly lower 
expenses and reduced time in order to either commission or reconfigure of robot ised manufacturing. In UC1.5 the 
goal is to demonstrate how to achieve deployment of new robots into existing plants through automatic on-boarding 
of industry requirements. This encompasses auto-configuration of (mobile) robots and the corresponding 5G service 
configuration needed for interconnection / interworking across solutions from different vendors. The possible vendor 
lock-in caused by incompatibilities, use of different standards and different use of existing standards as well as the 
complexity resulting in extensive commissioning time and excessive man hours needed for the integration, are often 
seen as major obstacles for modern automation in various industries. 
 
Test Objectives Requirements  Key Actors 
▪ To test possible systems integration through automatic on 
boarding of requirements. 
▪ Installation of a private 
5G RAN node within 
▪ NTNU 
▪ TNOR 
                                                 
28 https://5g-ppp.eu/wp-content/uploads/2014/02/5G-PPP-White-Paper-on-Factories-of-the-Future-Vertical-Sector.pdf  
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  26  
▪ To verify performance of the 5G RAN with the 
communication configured automatically. 
NTNU Manulab/Industry 
4.0 facilities  
▪ YARA 
 
 
Technological KPIs to be validated 
Use Case  KPIs 
Data Rate 
(Mbps) 
Mobility 
(km/h) 
Latency 
(ms) 
Density 
(devices/m2) 
Reliability 
(%) 
Positioning 
Accuracy (m) 
Coverage 
(%) 
Autonomy 
(days) 
UC 1.1  >100 <10 <5 >0.1 >99.999 <0.5 >99 - 
UC 1.2  >10 <10  <100  >0.1 >99.99 <0.5 >99 >30 
UC 1.3  >500 <10  <5 >10-2  >99.99 <0.5 >99 - 
UC 1.4  >10 >30  <10 >10-4 >95 <10  >99.9 >30 
UC 1.5  >100 <50 <1 >1 >99.999 <0.1 >99.9 >30 
 
 
Living Lab 2: Smart Energy  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction29 
Over the last two decades, the power supply industry has been the subject of a deep 
transformation. On one hand, the unbundling, namely the process of splitting vertically 
integrated utilities into a number of generation, transmission, distribution and energy retailing 
companies has been the basis for the introduction of competitive electricity markets; on the 
other hand, the continuing increase in renewable energy sources (RES), the introduction of the 
active demand  concept, the deployment of energy storag e systems  (ESSs) and finally the 
expected transition from fossil fuels based to plugin electric vehicles (PEV), represent key 
challenges and opportunities, requiring a deep renovation in power systems operation. The transition from traditional 
electricity grids to smart grids  is driven by the large -scale deployment of telecommunications infrastructures, 
supporting innovative real time control systems, aimed at coordinating the action of traditionally uncoordinated 
equipment and grid players towards a set of  common objectives. In the light of the above, this LL is aimed at 
providing evidence about the potential benefits from large-scale adoption of 5G technology in the smart grid sector; 
a preliminary evaluation of expected 5G KPIs reveals that the added valu e brought by the new generation of 
communication technology lies in its level of reliability, low latency and wide coverage.  
This LL will target three use cases referring to the broad area of Demand Side Management (DSM). DSM refers to 
the changes in electricity use by consumers from their normal consumption patterns in response to incentive payments 
designed to induce lower electricity use at times of high wholesale market prices or when system reliability is 
jeopardised. In a broader sense, DSM also embeds the topic of overload avoidance and optimal self-consumption, in 
those scenarios where the peak power affects the energy bill, and local RES have an impact on the net power 
withdrawn from the grid.  
 
Context – Business Situation & Drivers30  
The renovation of electricity grids is driven both by political, regulatory and technological aspects. On one hand, 
there is the political will to reduce the carbon footprint on a global scale, and on the other, the technological progress 
in the area of RES, PEVs and ESSs. This results in the continuous update of the regulation by national electricity 
authorities, which poses new stringent requirements and opens the way to new use cases, where communication 
technology represents a key enab ler.  In the area of DSM, many business opportunities can be identified. Active 
consumers may take advantage of the time varying charging nature of electricity price and be interested in an optimal 
usage of local energy sources; t his class of consumers, in  an aggregated form, has been recently accepted by the 
regulation for participating in  the Dispatching Markets, where the operator of the electricity transmission network 
buys the balancing power needed to operate the network. Consequently, players like retailers, aggregators, service 
providers, telco operators and start -ups from the green energy economy play a fundamental role for enabling 
consumers to play the foreseen active role, and all of them become key elements of the new electricity value chain. 
 
Main Participants and their role:  
Partic. Role 
A2T 
Design and simulation of control strategies enabling the execution of Living Lab’s use cases, development 
and deployment of software modules implementing the control strategies, technical suppor t for the 
validation activities executed by ENEL and IREN. 
ENEL ENEL will design, develop and deploy the technical solutions needed for the execution of the use cases 
UC2.2 and UC2.3 using TIM’s 5G RAN node in their test site in Rome (part of 5G-EVE Turin facility), 
                                                 
29 Based on https://5g-ppp.eu/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/BROCHURE_5PPP_BAT2_PL.pdf  
30 5G PPP, White Paper, 5G and Energy. 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  27  
apart from providing equipment and back -end solutions to IREN for the validation of UC2.2 in the test 
site in Turin. Also engaged in field trials for the validation of the solution and performance evaluation. 
IREN 
Design, development and deployment of technical solutions needed for the execution of UC2.1 and UC2.2 
in the test site of T urin. Regarding UC2.2, IREN will install and operate at let least one ENEL charging 
station for EVs managed by ENEL’s asset management platform. Also engaged in field trials for the 
validation of the technical solution and performance evaluation. 
 
The following use cases require 5G network capabilities, such as high reliability and low latencies (<10ms). 
 
Use Case 2.1: Industrial Demand Side Management 
This use case deals with DSM at the level of business consumers (large, medium or small enterprises). The focus is 
on the optimal scheduling of industrial loads during normal plant operation, the computation and actuation of 
flexibilities offered on the Dispatching Market and the control actions needed to keep the peak power consumption 
limited. The first aspect covered by this use case is the planning and aggregation of loads. A distributed monitoring 
and load shifting control system (based on sensors, met ers and in -cloud data analytics  and control tools), will be 
setup to perform a real-time schedule of loads and assess the energy behaviour of each activity/production, with the 
aim of evaluating possible actions of power reduction to be offered on the Dispatching Markets; this action may be 
performed by the customer as a single actor of the market, if the power reduction constraints set by the Regulator are 
met, or in aggregated form with other prosumers (by means of an Aggregator). 5G technology is expected to play an 
important role, as both data communication from the field to the cloud and communications among the Aggregator 
and involved customers must be reliable, fast and with minimal delay ( latency). The second aspect concerns the 
peak power consumption, which represents one of the critical paramete rs for this class of customer segment. The 
simultaneous use of electrical devices may involve peak loads that can result in the tripping of commercial meter s 
due to overload detection.  
 
With the introduction of new tariff schemes accounting for the peak power consumption in addition to the energy 
component (e.g. maximum demand) and the presence of fluctuating Renewable Energy Sources (RES), the problem 
of keeping the peak power limited is quite important: it appears crucial to rely on a technological solution to promptly 
switch off the loads responsible for the peak/overload and, therefore, to reschedule the load in a more efficient way. 
5G technology can play a crucial role: a post-commercial meter will be used to detect the power peak/overload and 
generate a n alert , which will be transferred to a pre-selected set of control devices  that will reduce the power 
consumption and trigger the computation of a new load schedule as a recovery action. Hence, the objective of this 
use case is to demonstrate in the field that 5G technology can be effectively used for offering new grid services and 
drastically reduce the tolerance implemented on the meters before disconnection, without having an impact  on the 
customer perception and quality of service.  To enable the testing and validation of this use case a number of 
distributed indoor sensors (post fiscal meters) , Energy Management Systems and Aggregator Management system 
will be used (included in IREN’s budget under “other direct costs”). 
 
Test Objectives How it will be tested? Requirements Key actors 
▪ To receive, access, 
process and respond to 
real-time information 
about energy 
consumptions via 5G 
for energy efficiency 
purposes 
▪ Monitor, aggregate 
and control 
electrical devices 
through 5G 
This use case involves one or more business 
customers and/or energy producers for which the 
management of peak power consumption is crucial 
and interested in providing balancing services to the 
electric market and grids. These actors will adopt 
dedicated devices that will provide real time 
connection among the metering and actuation  
systems, also involving back -end platforms, such as 
the Enterprise Energy Management system and the 
Aggregator platform for market bidding purposes.  
Communication and/or direct energy balancing 
actuations at customers’ premises (business ones) by 
the Aggregator will be performed via 5G network. 
▪ Availability 
of 5G-EVE 
Turin facility 
to support 
measurements 
of key KPIs 
of latency and 
data rate. 
▪ Smart 
inhouse 
energy 
consumption 
device. 
▪ A2T 
▪ IREN 
 
Use Case 2.2: Electrical Vehicle Smart Charging  
Smart charging is a form of DSM in which the choice of the charging station used for recharging a PEV and the 
power absorbed during the process are under the control of a charging point operator, according to a set of grid 
boundary conditions and drivers’ charging preferences. Also, the driver experience may involve a variety of 
interactions between the driver and the charging infrastructure through apps and the charging station dashboard, 
depending on the charging point operational policies and business models. As indicated in Figures 1.8 and 1.9, EVs 
penetration in the markets is rising and expected to grow even further in the coming years; by 2040, 54% of new car 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  28  
sales and 33% of the global car fleet will be electric31. This new paradigm in mobility implies a strong interaction of 
EVs and electricity distribution grids, posing new challenges and opportunities in the way the next generation 
networks will be operated. In this regard, the 5G network can be used for allowing a reliable real time scheduling of 
charging sessions and provide a fast reschedule in case of an overload, in case a contractual threshold is overcome 
due to an excessive number of simultaneous charging sessions, or in case the electric power generated from 
renewables suddenly falls short of the predictions.  
 
 
To enable the testing and validation of this use case, a set of public charging points equipped with 5G communication 
devices will be used, under the control of a charging platform , enabling innovative services interconnecting the e -
mobility stakeholders (integration with H2020 NEMO and FP7 MOBINCITY projects is envisaged in different test 
sites). This equipment is included in the budget of ENEL and IREN under “other direct costs”. 
 
Test Objectives How it will be tested? Requirements Key Actors 
▪ To exchange control metering data via 
5G among the charging stations and the 
charging infrastructure back-end. 
▪ To demonstrate remote and continuous 
communication between charging point 
operators to monitor and report on EV 
charging via 5G. In this way an 
aggregator can control smart charging 
by grouping EVs according to size, etc. 
Provide real -time EV data 
so that charging can be 
effectively supported and 
coordinated. Enable a two -
way communication via 5G 
to provide consumers with 
real-time data in order to 
schedule EV charging. 
5G-EVE Turin 
facility and remote 
5G RAN node in 
Rome availability 
to support testing 
and measurements 
of key KPIs related 
to reliability and 
latency. 
▪ A2T 
▪ ENEL 
▪ IREN 
 
Use Case 2.3: Electricity network frequency stability  
This use case deals with the involvement of active demand in the provisioning of the electricity services needed to 
maintain the electricity network frequency at its rated value (e.g. 50 Hz in Europe). Basically, the network frequency 
depends on the difference between the demand and supply, and remains con stant so long as this difference is zero. 
Any imbalance between the demand and supply sides results in a deviation from the nominal network frequency, 
which is typically resolved by the Transmission System Operator (TSO) by asking the generators to provide or release 
the power needed to clear the imbalance (balancing service). The Dispatching Market, namely the market where the 
TSO buys this service from legacy generators, has been recently opened to active demand, and Plugin Electric 
Vehicles (PEVs) aggregates appears the most promising form of active demand to this purpose. 
 
Since network frequency instability can occur within  seconds or less, a fundamental requirement to enable PEVs 
smart charging to frequency regulation functions is the availability of highly reliable and low latency communications 
allowing a fast and coordinated action of distributed PEVs aggregates. Keeping in mind that the current smart meters 
installed in the charging stations take measurements every minute, and that the measurements do not include network 
frequency, in the absence of a highly performing communication infrastructure, each charging station should react 
alone and be equipped with a new, potentially expensive, frequency meter.  Hence, t he deployment of 5G 
communications in charging stations could dramatically decrease the number of frequency meters needed to provide 
the balancing service, and consequently the related total cost of ownership . The smart charging system involved in 
use case 2.2 can be extended to create the superposition of two control signals working on different time scales: a 
                                                 
31 Electric Vehicle Outlook 2017, Bloomberg New Energy Finance’s annual long-term forecast of the world’s electric vehicle market, available 
at https://data.bloomberglp.com/bnef/sites/14/2017/07/BNEF_EVO_2017_ExecutiveSummary.pdf  
  
Figure 1.8: Forecasted global EV sales by vehicle 
class31 
Figure 1.9: Estimated short-term EV sales penetration 
per country31 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  29  
slow control signal, computed according to the requirements of use case 2.2 under the assumption of nominal network 
frequency, and a fast control signal, computed by a new controller installed in the charging stations, driven via 5G 
by the real time measurements of network frequency. 
 
To enable the testing and validation of this use case, a set of 5-10 public charging stations equipped with 5G modems 
will be used. One of the charging stations will be enabled to take real time measurements of network frequency and 
forward them to the other charging stations involved in the provisioning of the balancing service. The charging 
stations will be equipped with local controllers driven by the frequency measurements received by the master.  
 
Test Objectives How it will be tested? Requirements Key Actors 
▪ Power network 
frequency via 5G to the 
charging stations. 
▪ Remote and continuous 
communication among 
TSO and aggregators to 
monitor and report on 
EV charging via 5G. 
A dedicated testbed of indoor and 
outdoor public charging infrastructure 
equipped with a frequency meter and 
5G, relying on a back-end and local 
control infrastructure enabling the fast 
intervention needed for the 
provisioning of the frequency 
regulation service. 
▪ 5G RAN node in Rome 
availability to support 
testing and 
measurements of key 
KPIs related to latency. 
▪ Remote voltage/current 
sensors and smart relays 
vendors 
▪ A2T 
▪ ENEL 
Technological KPIs to be validated: 
 
 
Living Lab 3: Smart Cities & Ports  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 
In Europe, cities account for 75% of the population consuming 80% of the EU’s energy 32. On 
one hand, this influx of people can create new opportunities for cities but on the other  hand it 
poses major economic, environmental, social and safety challenges as well, 
since many cities were built on infrastructure designed for smaller, less 
active population33. Therefore, the need for innovative solutions facing the 
rising demands and different challenges, is growing. The vision of a smart 
city “incorporates the six “s” , i.e.  a shared, secure and scalable 
infrastructure that enables human possibilities in a manner that is smart, safe and sustainable.  
This vision is achieved by a smart network connecting sensors, machines and citizens to cloud-
based internet of things (IoT) applications”34. 
Likewise, ports are complex systems involving a wide number of stakeholders, such as port operators, authorities 
and shipping companies. As global trade is expanding, ship sizes and cargo volumes are increasing, placing additional 
pressure on ship berths and yards. Ports are therefore becoming increasingly interested in smart solutions to help 
optimise and improve their operational efficiency and reduce logistics costs.  
 
Context – Business Situation & Drivers 
Cities and ports constitute complex ecosystems comprising a range of stakeholders, developing and deploying new 
services, that passes through technological, social, organisational, and business domains. Understanding the rollout 
of technologies and their relative importance in the ecosystem requires understanding the business drivers that affect 
their deployment and uptake, and an overview of the smart city marketplace35. 
 
Solution – Technology Perspective 
Through the u se of digital and telecommunications technologies traditional networks and services become more 
efficient for the inhabitants, business’ and ports benefit36. It is estimated that 50 billion devices will be connected to 
mobile networks by 2020, while a large proportion of communications will occur between machines and not humans. 
                                                 
32 http://www.eurocities.eu/eurocities/issues/cohesion-policy-issue&newsstart=21&newscount=10&contentURL=cohesion-policy-issue  
33 https://www.gsma.com/iot/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/cl_smartcities_05_17.pdf  
34 NOKIA Strategic White Paper – “Enabling smart, safe and sustainable cities”, 2017, available at: 
https://pages.NOKIA.com/8635.Enabling.Smart.Safe.and.Sustainable.Cities.html  
35 http://rodger.global-linguist.com/tag/smart-cities/  
36 https://ec.europa.eu/info/eu-regional-and-urban-development/topics/cities-and-urban-development/city-initiatives/smart-cities_en  
Use Case Indicative KPIs 
Data Rate (kbps) Latency (ms) Reliability (%) Coverage 
UC 2.1 Not critical <10 >99.999 >99.9% Indoor 
UC 2.2 Not critical <10 >99.999 >99.9% Outdoor  
UC 2.3 Not critical <10 >99.999 >99.9% Outdoor 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  30  
In this respect, 5G supporting mMTC, eMBB, URLLC, virtualisation and slicing will be able to respond to the smart 
cities and ports of the future. The use cases to be validated in this LL include the following:  
 
Use Case 3.1: Intelligent street lighting   Use Case 3.4: Smart buildings – smart campus 
Use Case 3.2: Smart parking    Use Case 3.5: Autonomous assets & logistics for smart port 
Use Case 3.3: Smart city co-creation       Use Case 3.6: Port safety: monitor & detect irregular sounds 
 
 
Main Participants and their role:  
Partic. Role 
IBM 
IBM’s primary role in this project is to lead the Smart Cities & Ports LL by doing research in the 
deployment and validation of machine learning systems for 5G use cases. In addition, IBM will be 
responsible for validating UC 3.4 for the analysis of the results relative to the baseline target KPI values. 
NTNU In collaboration with YARA and TNOR, the NTNU will support the UC 3.5, and consider transfer of 
relevant knowledge and techniques from/to UC 1.5.    
NURO 
NURO will work in the development of various end user applications, VNFs and other components to 
develop the use cases for the trials.  NURO will also lead UC 3.1 & UC 3.2 and participate in UC 3.6 
using previously gained knowledge in smart cities, usage optimisation and real-time data analyses. 
TNOR 
TNOR will support the partners in conducting the trials using its 5G-VINNI facility in Norway extended 
with the 5G RAN node for Trondheim (adapted and based on the NTNU FoF 5G RAN node). TNOR will 
also facilitate UC 3.3  and actively participating in the Ur ban Living Lab innovation way of work in 
collaboration with NTNU Smart Sustainable City (see Letter of Support). TNOR will also have an active 
role in support and field trials of the Smart Port use cases. The Smart Port Living Lab will be prepared for 
rapid re-deployment of use cases according to 5G-VINNI concepts and mechanisms.      
YARA 
YARA will test in UC 3.5 an autonomous cargo vessel and autonomous land -based cargo logistics 
handling assets in real operations at Herøya port over the 5G VINNI Norway facility extended by Herøya 
5G RAN node. This includes the smart port and logistics to the plant cargo loading area, which will be 
operated in a mixed traffic environment. 
 
The goal is not only to conduct field trials in isolation but also include their capabilities as part of wider offerings to 
the “Smart City co -creation” community. UC3.1 and UC3.2 will be validated during the first two testing cycles, 
whereas UC 3.3 “Smart City co-creation” will be trialled in testing cycles 2 and 3 (see Figure 1.5 and Table 1.4). 
 
Use Case 3.1: Intelligent street lighting  
The primary objective is t o accelerate the use of intelligent lighting in smart cities and increase the environmental, 
financial, safety and security benefits that societies can have. With intelligent street lighting over 60% of power can 
be saved44, and light pollution can be significantly decreased 44. By dynamically adjusting street lighting based on 
traffic conditions (pedestrians or vehicular) both security as well as safety of the inhabitants can be improved . In 
addition, road safety is maximised, whereas the operational costs are minimised37.  
 
Test Objectives Requirements Key players 
▪ Energy use reduction 
▪ Map-based visualisations for quick and 
easy access enhancing user’s 
experience  
▪ Remote (secure) management of public 
street lighting 
▪ IoT probes to emulate smart devices in street 
lighting (to be provided by NURO) 
▪ Automatic data notifications in order to respond to 
outages and other systems issues 
▪ Availability of 5G-VINNI Norway facility 
supporting MEC functionality for real time data 
provisioning through 5G 
▪ NURO 
▪ TNOR 
 
Use Case 3.2: Smart parking 
The primary objective is to allow drivers to look for inter-city parking spaces so as to easily spot the most convenient 
and available parking places. Smart parking solutions aim to reduce congestion, emissions and improve traffic safety 
allowing at the same time higher quality of li fe for the residents. A smart parking system can benefit not only the 
drivers and the operators but the city councils as well. Smart parking saves time and costs for the drivers, whereas 
municipalities are able to provide a more efficient traffic guidance increasing their profits while complying with 
relevant emissions requirements38.  
 
                                                 
37 https://www.mobility.siemens.com/mobility/global/sitecollectiondocuments/en/road-solutions/urban/trends/isl-control-cabinets.pdf  
38 https://www.siemens.com/content/dam/webassetpool/mam/tag-siemens-com/smdb/mobility/road/parking-solutions/integrated-smart-
parking/documents/smart-parking-brochure2.pdf  
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  31  
Test 
Objectives 
Requirements Key players 
Fast and easy 
identification of 
empty parking 
spaces  
▪ Smartphone application for guiding the drivers to the closest available free 
parking place (to be provided by NURO) 
▪ Interface to parking systems for retrieving real-time data on parking slots. 
▪ Availability of 5G-VINNI Norway facility for real-time parking information 
▪ NURO 
▪ TNOR 
 
Use Case 3.3: Smart city co-creation 
The primary objective of this use case is to provide a wider approach to Smart City/IoT co -creation and exploring, 
in collaboration with a H2020 Smart City Lighthouse project (+CityxChange) managed by NTNU Sustainable Smart 
City (SSC) and other relevant projects in scope of NTNU SSC. The Urban Living Lab innovation and co-creation 
way of work and methodologies will be used and assessed.  
 
Test Objectives Requirements Key players 
▪ Agility for use case definition and on-boarding 
(MEC or non-MEC), considering both using pre-
established function and self-on-boarded function  
▪ Exploring customer-facing KPIs and their relevance  
▪ Explore & assess methodologies like “Co-operative 
Inquiry Methodology” and Urban LL innovation and 
co-creation. 
▪ Open accessibility of 5G-VINNI 
Norway facility for their testing 
framework and 3rd party function on-
boarding, e.g. onto the MEC platform.  
▪ Open accessibility of the 5G-
SOLUTIONS data collection and 
visualisation 
▪ TNOR 
▪ NTNU 
SSC39 
 
 
In addition to the target 5G network KPIs stated below, this use case will also develop and assess KPIs for fast on -
boarding and service provisioning (KPI from 90 days to 90 minutes), and Smart-City application specific KPIs. The 
specific KPIs will be developed as part of the Smart city co-creation process in task T1.1 as adapted in collaboration 
with NTNU SSC and their methodologies for design thinking, Urban Living Lab and co-creation. 
 
 
 
Use Case 3.4: Smart buildings – Smart Campus 
Currently there is a huge type of IoT sensors installed across the IBM Technology Campus including CO2, brightness, 
room temperature sensors, etc. A significant percentage of the IoT data collected from the sensors above is stored in 
a central data warehouse on campus by means of a central Business Management System (BMS) Data Integrator, 
which collects data from individual BMS systems that are respon sible for power, on campus weather stations and 
lighting etc. The purpose of UC3.4 is to enable the continued IoT evolution of the IBM technology campus from a 
set of individual smart buildings into to a smart IoT environment that provides a safer and more efficiently managed 
working environment for all IBM staff, customers and visitors and also to use the knowledge gained to help drive 
advancements in cognitive IoT to a global scale by reflecting it in IBM products and services. Currently , there are 
thousands of IoT sensors of varying types in operation in the IBM campus, reporting back to a multitude of safety 
and workplace management systems. There are varying standards and sophistication of IoT endpoints and varied 
proprietary software management systems  to manage their output. The endpoints range from state-of-the-art fire 
detection sensors right down to inexpensive heat sensors placed in computer racks in internal lab rooms by operations 
staff. Given the IBM campus is a series of automated and/or smart buildings, significant benefits are envisioned if a 
technological solution were designed and deployed that could help transition the IBM buildings into a smart campus. 
 
 
Test objectives Requirements Key players 
▪ Continued IoT 
evolution of IBM 
technology campus 
(e.g. smart 
buildings, smart 
IoT, etc) 
▪ Real-time IoT monitoring through 5G wireless connectivity 
▪ Reliable secure network ensuring accurate and timely information 
▪ Installation of a 5G RAN node from UOP within IBM smart campus 
▪ A formal usage permission for the spectrum in any frequency 
between 700MHz – 3.6GHz must be permitted for the 5G base 
station to be installed and operated on site in the IBM campus   
▪ IBM 
 
Use Case 3.5: Autonomous assets and logistics for smart port 
The purp ose of UC 3.5 is to  demonstrate the capabilities of 5G technology to support real -time operation and 
integration support for autonomous assets in a logistics hub at Herøya, Porsgrunn, Norway. The smart port will be a 
hub, where autonomous assets are received and served with logistics support. The autonomous test site includes the 
smart port as well as the logistics solution to the plant cargo loading area, which will be operated in a mixed traffic 
environment. The test site will have a dedicated autonomous vessel (Birkeland) with autonomous land -based cargo 
handling assets. This UC will explore the enhanced service offering enabled by 5G technology.  
 
                                                 
39 NTNU Sustainable Smart City (SSC) is another department within NTNU that does not participate in the 5G-SOLUTIONS consortium. UC 
3.3 will be executed in cooperation with NTNU SSC. See UC 3.3 description and Letter of Support in Annex 2 Section 4. 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  32  
The hypothesis is that advanced 5G technology and communication protocols  will enable the port’s autonomous 
infrastructure (cranes, carriers, energy infrastructure, etc.) to serve multiple (not pre-defined) assets with onloading 
and offloading as well as fueling/charging, and potentially basic maintenance. It will be of importance to understand 
if the accuracy of 5G positioning is sufficient to support autonomous operations, without additional GPS equipment. 
The assets would mainly be ships, but can potentially be expanded also to port vehicles. A multi-access cloud will 
be supporting 3rd party applications with assured quality connectivity and handle the integration between the assets 
to provide optimised logistics operations. Safety, reliability and security are key priorities of this use case.   
 
UC 3.5 will also integrate findings from the UC 1.5, to enable “rapid deployment and auto/re-configuration” in the 
smart port. Learnings from UC 1.3 and UC 1.4 are also relevant to UC 3.5, which has the characteristics both of a 
“remote controlled digital factory” and a logistics chain of “connected goods”. 
 
Test objectives Requirements Key players 
▪ Demonstrate the 5G technology’s 
potential to increase service offering in 
the smart port. 
▪ Demonstrate the multi-access cloud to 
provide connectivity and logistics 
support to vessels and port vehicles 
that are not pre-defined 
▪ Demonstrate and explore the accuracy 
in positioning 
▪ Demonstrate signal coverage both in 
reach and inside concrete buildings   
▪ Test IT security 
▪ Testing of smart and rapid re-
deployment of use case 
▪ Installation of a private 5G node at the Birkeland 
port / quayside at Herøya. 
▪ Development of applications and communication 
protocols to govern the logistics interface between 
port infrastructure and new, undefined assets. 
▪ Use of 3 straddle carriers, 1 crane and 1 vessel 
equipped with 5G client UEs (by YARA) 
▪ Multi-access cloud functionality 
▪ Seamless transmission between base stations 
(hand-over / roaming) 
▪ IT security penetration testing – 3rd party 
vulnerability test  
▪ Readiness and exposure of 5G-VINNI capabilities 
for rapid re-deployment of use case 
▪ TNOR 
▪ YARA 
 
 
Use Case 3.6: Port safety - Monitor & detect irregular sounds 
Irregular noise or sound detection technology, such as for explosions or gunshot detection, is considered a major 
safety and security part of a smart port design. The deployment of such detection systems (e.g. sensitive microphones 
and UHD+ 360 o CCTV cameras) through the use of a reliable 5G network, transmitting real -time audio -visual 
information on events to the ports operations centre, is of outmost importance to port authorities by allowing them to 
act immediately and find out the exact location of the incident. 
 
Test objectives Requirements Key players 
▪ Precise information 
identification on the 
specifics of the 
event, e.g. shooter’s 
location 
▪ Real-time monitoring through 5G wireless connectivity 
▪ Reliable secure network ensuring accurate and timely information 
(relevant KPI latency) 
▪ Sensors attached to the street lighting controls in order to generate 
detailed, location-based information  
▪ UHD+ video surveillance systems 
▪ Availability of 5G-VINNI Norway facility 
▪ TNOR 
▪ NURO 
 
Technological KPIs to be validated: 
Use Case KPIs  
Data Rate 
(Mbps) 
Mobility 
(km/h) 
Latency 
(ms) 
Density 
(devices/m2) 
Reliability 
(%) 
Positioning 
Accuracy (m) 
Coverage 
(%) 
Service 
provisioning 
time (minutes) 
UC 3.1  - - <100 >1 >99 - >99 - 
UC 3.2  - <100 <100 >0.1 >95 <10 >95 - 
UC 3.3 >10 <50 <10 >1 >99.99 <1 >95 <90 
UC 3.4 >100 - <10 >1 >99.99 <1 >99.9 - 
UC 3.5  >100 <50 <10 >1 >99.99 <0.5 >99.9 - 
UC 3.6 >100 <10 <10 >0.1 >99.99 <10 >99.9 - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  33  
Living Lab 4: Media & Entertainment (M&E) 
Introduction: 
M&E services need to cope with increasing demand in terms of data rates, number 
of simultaneous users connected and/or more stringent QoS requirements. High 
quality and high-resolution audio -visual services are important drivers for 
increased downlink data rates , where 5G promises to provide cost -effective 
alternatives to today’s Content Delivery Network (CDN) approaches. At the same 
time, user generated content , as well as the use of  cellular technology for 
professional and semi-professional media production are key drivers for increased 
uplink data rates.  Cellular, especially when used in bonding multiple links, has 
been replacing the traditional uplink method of satelli te trucks transmission and enabled live high -quality 
transmission to all sorts of media content providers. 5G will enable this viable and immensely growing area of cellular 
and IP-based live media production as a business to grow further, supporting new business models, such as production 
in the cloud , at lower costs .  5G will seamlessly integrate services over different network technologies (fixed, 
wireless), topologies (including e.g. unicast, multicast and broadcast) and capabilities (e.g. caching and multi-link), 
which may be needed to cover all M&E use cases. The main uses cases identified in this LL are the following: 
Use Case 4.1: Ultra High-Fidelity Media;  Use Case 4.4: User & Machine Generated Content; 
Use Case 4.2: Multi CDN selection;   Use Case 4.5: Immersive and Integrated Media and Gaming; 
Use Case 4.3: On-site Live Event Experience;  Use Case 4.6: Cooperative Media Production. 
 
 
Context – Business Situation & Drivers 
5G networks will catalyse the media industry chain, from production and contribution to distribution. 5G networks’ 
ability to dynamically respond to such needs will be the key driver for the provision of next generation media services.  
 
Production and contribution business scenarios:  In terms of professional media production and contribution 
operations, 5G will become the cost-affordable companion to be employed, saving space and specialised maintenance 
of equipment, replaced by smaller and general -purpose communications equipment. New business models include 
IP media workflows, remote live production, where the video assets are in the cloud and the involved team members 
are in their homes or offices, as well as enhanced media production services, given that cloud resources and AI/big-
data processing solutions can be used in real time with the live high -fidelity video uplink in a 5G network.  Further 
business drivers are described include: increased productivity and revenues by enabling producing and handling more 
live events simultaneou sly, significantly reduced costs by reducing size and travel of big production teams and 
equipment trucks to event sites, reduced costs compared to traditional media contribution over dedicated satellite, 
reduced costs due to enabling usage of cloud-based production software, increasing viewers engagement by providing 
more content and at a higher quality and higher overall QoE (such as more fluent and reliable video) content on TV 
and online including on social networks, using fewer modems and SIM cards in multilink bonded transmission (even 
from the same 5G operator), using multilink on the same operator for example by using “multi-slice” – a technology 
of bonding two modems on two different network slices. 
 
Distribution business scenarios: According to Cisco’s Visual Networking Index 40, video content is expected to be 
responsible for 75% of the mobile data traffic  by 2021.  At the same time, media companies and content providers 
are affected by rising CDN costs. 5G is expected to reduce content distribution costs and offer a competitive business 
advantage to Mobile Network Operators ( MNOs) that will be able to provide transparent multicast and broadcast 
capabilities, at a considerably lower network load. Caching close to the edge provides an interesting comme rcial 
opportunity for MNOs.  
 
Solution – Technology Perspective 
Taking into account that the media traffic is the main traffic type, volume-wise being delivered by the networks, the 
new 5G networks will play a major role in media distribution. The solution must be transparent in different levels, 
from the media delivery protocol perspective to be universally adopted, and from the networking efficiency to avoid 
overheads with extra messaging. This can become a reality by using content delivery analytics to measure the speed 
and availability of different delivery paths over the network. 5G slicing, Multi-access Edge Computing (MEC), Fog 
and Mist Computing architectures can make the difference in order to exploit in an isolated and scalable way geo -
based network and QoS analytics with almost zero latency. In this regard, SDN over NFV virtualisation technologies 
bring new possibilities to make an efficient and dynamic setup and provision of the infrastructure. The use of multiple 
IP-based connections bonded together , enables higher bandwidth, higher reliability and lower delay. An inherent 
multicast and broadcast mode with supp ort for large cells and a single -frequency mode provides a highly efficient 
mean for distribution of high -quality and/or immersive content to many concurrent users. Target devices include 
                                                 
40 https://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/solutions/collateral/service-provider/visual-networking-index-vni/mobile-white-paper-c11-520862.pdf  
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  34  
regular smartphones, VR/AR glasses, TV sets, public displays as well as in -car entertainment systems (which are 
expected to gain an increasing role in the advent of automated driving). 
 
 
Main Participants and their role:  
Part. Role  
FNET 
FNET will offer the commercial NovaGO IPTV service and associated applications. The NovaGO service 
targets mobile subscribers consuming live and on demand content using their mobiles, tablets and laptop 
UEs. In addition, FNET will offer the Nova OnDemand commercial service , which is delivered via set-
top-boxes (STBs), connected to a mobile UE device. 
IRT 
IRT will evaluate network performance for mass distribution of high-quality audio-visual content (live 
and/or on-demand). With high network loads it is crucial to balance and steer individual streams, e.g. by 
network-assisted technologies like MPEG SAND.  IRT will also evaluate network performance and 
reliability for content uplinks, e.g. for live production use cases. 
LIVEU 
LIVEU will provide knowledge and uplink video transmission in single link (e.g. adaptive video over 
fluctuating or stable 5G link) and bonding devices (two links from the same 5G operator on the same 
network slice or different ones – multi-slice, and/or bonding 5G & 4G or others)  in support of the real 
time professional content production and UGC, up to 4K,  adaptively using the most state-of-the art real 
time video encoding – HEVC H.265. Design of co-located two or more 5G modems in the same device. 
CTTC 
CTTC will be involved in all use cases of this LL designing novel caching techniques and machine -
learning algorithms for network status prediction , dynamic slicing algorithms, uplink-oriented slicing 
schemes, innovative E2E dynamic inter -slicing algorithms and novel intra -slicing network schemes, 
capable of handling different content types. 
UOP 
 
 
TNOR 
Being part of the 5G-VINNI project, UOP will implement one of the four 5G-VINNI facilities in the area 
of city of Patras in the Western Region of Greece. In this context, UOP will host and provide operational 
support for multimedia use cases. It will also interconnect and interoperate with the 5G-VINNI Norway 
ICT-17 facilit y that will also host service components of similar use cases in order to support cross -
domain communication scenarios and service deployments of verticals.  
TNOR will contribute to the provisioning and on -demand handling of value-added connectivity across 
borders, including QoS and QoE strategies and assessment, as well as corresponding business models. 
NURO NURO will set up of a collaborative gam ing environment using a distributed approach as well as the 
testing of various AR/VR applications. 
 
Use Case 4.1: Ultra High-Fidelity (UHF) Media  
Rapid progress in display and capture technologies is enabling a new, highly immersive production and viewing 
experience with ultra -crisp, wide-view pictures with deep contrast and multi-channel sound. Both linear and non -
linear content will be used for testing the Ultra High -Fidelity Media (UHFM) experience. In order to guarantee a 
high quality of experience for UHFM, 5G network should be able to support efficient network management , fair 
resource allocation, high speed transport capabilities and strategies, e.g. by means of local and network caching of 
content. UC 4.1 involves media streaming to devices using a variety of applications supported by the partners under 
different network configurations. 
 
 
Use Case 4.2: Multi CDN selection 
Media services distributed through multiple CDNs need to be shielded from content delivery degradation and outages. 
ETSI 5G MEC architecture supports smart edge delivery decisions by exploiting geo-based QoS/QoE analytics in a 
capillary, scalable and zero latency manner. MEC can also host edge cloud storage services to make content 
distribution significantly more efficient. Caching popular contents at the network edge saves traf fic on the network 
backhaul and core making distribution costs lower and network capacity thinner. To this end, active monitoring by 
smart proxies paired to gNodeBs in combination with enhanced client-side analytics can predictively decide to switch 
to alternative CDNs or to cache a content in order to prevent degradation or improve the QoE. A generic test scenario 
involves the utilisation of various CDN vendors. By deploying smart proxies and caching on the RAN along with the 
Test Objectives Requirements Participants 
▪ Verify that 
caching of content 
improves 
downlink speed 
and latency. 
▪ Evaluate network 
management 
strategies. 
▪ Local and/or network 
caching infrastructure and 
services provided by the 
testbeds.  
▪ Real or simulated traffic 
and relative applications. 
▪ 5G-VINNI Patra ICT-17 
facility availability. 
▪ FNET and IRT will provide real and/or simulated 
traffic and the relative applications.  
▪ UOP will provide the 5G infrastructure. 
▪ CTTC will design novel caching techniques exploiting 
the knowledge of local and global content popularities, 
while advanced machine learning-based algorithms 
will enable the short and long-term prediction of the 
network status. 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  35  
integration of an enhanced client-side analytics tool, QoS and QoE analytics data will be gathered in order to evaluate 
QoS and QoE metrics in real -time. This evaluation enables the service provider to update the MPEG  Dynamic 
Adaptive Streaming over HTTP or HTTP Live Streaming (HLS) dynamically. 
 
 
Use Case 4.3: On-site Live Event Experience 
In highly-populated live events, such as sports venues, music concerts, or carnivals, lots of users try to upload images, 
live videos and recorded clips as well as watch other participants content or background content related to the event. 
At the same time, special groups of users require continuous Service Level Agreements (SLAs) higher than those of 
the mass. The challenge for media service providers is to offer a good QoE to their clients in a dense client 
environment. Currently, the providers sharing the radio access, backhaul and core network  try to optimise their 
quality independently causing a dramatic degradation of the QoE. There are also special users such as emergency 
services and first responders, that require a steady QoS. 5G network must be able to provide extra resources for 
specific users, groups or services. UC 4.3 involves the generation and simulation of various subscriber profiles in 
terms of bitrate and quality requirements and the evaluation of the corresponding QoE. In addition, this use case will 
be validated with tens of real end-users in large live showcasing events of Patra’s carnival  (Q1 2021 & Q1 
2022). End-users, participants in the carnival,  will be provided with 5G enabled smartphones and/or applications 
(e.g. for uplink streaming) so that they can test the experience and provide us with feedback together with QoE 
evaluation, also helping us in validating the business potential of this particular use case. In addition, we will also 
demonstrate cross network c onnectivity on demand  through the 5G -VINNI facilities in Patra and in Norway. 
Uplink network performance and the quality of the uplinked/streamed content will also be measured and evaluated 
by end-user viewers.  
 
 
Use Case 4.4: User Generated Content (UGC) & Machine Generated Content (MGC) 
People and objects will capture more and more content in order to share it with others in the cloud. This means that 
5G networks should be able to support on demand high upload bandwidth and streaming from various heterogeneous 
devices/objects (e.g. cameras, health and wellness measurement equipment, building sensors, etc.).  Similar 
Test Objectives Requirements Participants 
▪ Evaluate CDN 
switching strategies to 
identify and prevent 
QoE effects under 
various CDN loading 
conditions. 
▪ Evaluate local caching 
strategies to optimize 
the efficiency on costs 
and traffic volume and 
boost the QoE for 
trending content 
situations. 
▪ Implement multi-CDN and 
caching strategies and embed 
on a proxy connected to a 
Software Defined Radio 
(SDR) entity along with an 
enhanced client-side analytics 
tool. 
▪ Deploy smart proxy/cache 
with parsing capacities for 
MPEG-DASH & HLS 
encrypted contents 
▪ 5G-VINNI Patra ICT-17 
facility availability. 
▪ IRT will provide the necessary servers, 
clients, analytics tools, access to multi-CDN 
for CDN-switching decision and smart edge 
cache. 
▪ UOP will provide the 5G facility (in 
particular SDR-based gNodeBs), hosting and 
onboarding capabilities for smart proxies/ 
caches as VNFs 
▪ CTTC will devise dynamic slicing 
algorithms, where the different types of 
resources (i.e., communication, storage, 
computation) will be allocated on-the-fly to 
boost the network performance. 
Test Objectives Requirements Participants 
▪ Evaluate co-existing 
network slicing strategies 
and their impact on user 
experience and network 
performance, under 
various traffic 
conditions. 
▪ Measure the downlink 
and uplink speeds under 
different profiles. 
▪ Evaluate network 
performance and user 
experience while 
offloading traffic 
between different 
networks and between 
slices. 
▪ Implement and test 
slicing strategies   
▪ Headless media players 
that generate QoE logs 
and can switch amongst a 
set of available 
Bitrates/Qualities. 
▪ Availability of videos of  
various qualities. 
▪ Distribution of videos 
through different RANs. 
▪ 5G-VINNI Patra & 
Norway ICT-17 facilities 
availability, including 
assured service quality 
(ASQ) interconnection. 
▪ LIVEU will provide uplink live streaming and 
recorded streaming application for Android or iOS, 
device with enhanced RF (compared to 
smartphones) for single link, multilink and multi-
slice uplink content generation, the receiving 
software servers (or cloud). 
▪ UOP will provide the 5G-VINNI Patra facility for 5G 
cellular coverage where the carnival is taking place. 
UOP will provide lifecycle management of the 
services to be deployed followed by operational 
support and testing, as well as administrative support 
for the real users’ engagement (in coordination with 
the city authorities and with CTTC).  
▪ TNOR will contribute to the provisioning and on -
demand handling of value-added connectivity (VAC) 
across borders  via 5G -VINNI interconnection 
capabilities. 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  36  
requirements apply to interactive ultra-high definition services when converging broadcast and user generated content 
is applied. UC 4.4 involves the generation and sharing of UGC using custom applications that will be provided by 
the partners, which will allow specific tests to be executed on the 5G-VINNI Patra facility, such as the contribution 
of high-quality live video (4K+) as well as lower quality UGC (smartphones). In addition, in recent years the multilink 
revolution has been disrupting the traditional SATCOM-based live coverage and enabled new market of live digital 
quality content. The advantages in multilink are high bandwidth and overall goodput, highest reliability, low latency, 
and full mobility – all at a fraction of the complexity and cost of satellite-based solutions. The advantages of multilink 
and multi-slice are achieved also when using two modems/links from the same operator. 
 
Test Objectives Requirements Participants 
▪ Measure uplink speed and latency, end-to-end 
and end-to-core point, under different 
subscription profiles. 
▪ Validate and evaluate: 
▪ QoE metrics, such as video start-up & latency, 
video freezing & buffering, continuity, etc. 
▪ UGC density support. 
▪ the value in multilinking 5G connections from 
the same operator for professional video 
coverage. 
▪ “multi-slice” – using multilink bonding done 
on two different slices of the same operator. 
▪ the uplink contribution at various network 
conditions such as cell-edge, reflections/multi-
path, different spectrum bands, etc. 
▪ other modes of professional usage, such as fast 
upload of GByte files of pre-recorded material.  
▪ High quality UGC 
▪ Mobile application 
for UGC 
acquisition and a 
UGC converging 
server. 
▪ 5G UEs  
▪ Professional video 
contribution 
solutions over 5G 
cellular single and 
multilink. 
▪ 5G-VINNI Patra 
ICT-17 facility 
availability. 
▪ FNET and LIVEU will provide 
the required UGC. Multilink, 
multi-slice and single link 
professional contribution 
solutions and applications. 
▪ UOP will offer its 5G-VINNI 
facility and corresponding 
resources to host the various 
UGC applications and the 
related use cases. 
▪ CTTC will design uplink-
oriented slicing schemes where 
resources will be allocated in an 
efficient manner to guarantee 
the QoS requirements of the 
UGC. 
 
Use Case 4.5: Immersive and Integrated Media and Gaming 
Media will become immersive and highly interactive to provide ambient media consumption at home but also on the 
move, with content capable of following the users and adapt to their ambient for viewing. New 5G capabilities will 
enable immersive video experience, to retransmit holographic type video beyond telepresence (2D) closer to a virtual 
presence experience in 3D 360o. Gaming will expand into a full immersive multi -sensorial environment which will 
result in a more realistic experience, improved ability for users to collaborate and no limitation on the number of 
simultaneous users41. Apart from ultra -fast connections and low latencies, Immersive and Integrated Media and 
Gaming requires a uniform user experience, i.e. one that does not significantly change due to the mobility or position 
in the cell. Uniform experience can be achieved through Massive MIMO and channel bonding. UC 4.5 involves the 
setting up of a collaborative game using a distributed approach as well as the testing of various AR/VR applications 
that will be provided by the partners.  In addition, UOP will perform a First-Person View (FPV) scenario involving 
both real time video experience and control  of a remote vehicle/drone involving simultaneously two slice types of 
eMBB and URLLC. 
 
 
Use Case 4.6: Cooperative Media Production 
Content will be captured and shared immediately, utilising 5G enabled video cameras, from anywhere to anywhere 
with additional data, such as location and date, automatically pre-attached. Different users in multiple locations will 
work upon the content simultaneously, which should be able to be automatically repurposed for different 
requirements i.e. second screens, interactive games. UC 4.6 involves geographically distributed journalists covering 
the same event (e.g. a football game, elections, etc.) from different key places. One or more remotely connected 
                                                 
41 https://5g-ppp.eu/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/5G-PPP-White-Paper-on-Media-Entertainment-Vertical-Sector.pdf  
Test Objectives Requirements Participants 
▪ Measure latency in 
collaborative gaming, 
combining distributed gaming 
architectures and caching. 
▪ Measure data throughput and 
QoE that can be achieved by 
employing channel bonding 
techniques.  
▪ Caching infrastructure and 
services. 
▪ Collaborative games 
implemented using a 
distributed architecture, 
various AR/VR applications. 
▪ 5G-VINNI Patra ICT-17 
facility availability. 
▪ NURO for games app and AR/VR. 
▪ UOP will provide the 5G-VINNI Patra 
facility and the FPV scenario. 
▪ CTTC will provide effective innovative 
E2E dynamic inter-slicing algorithms to 
enable a seamless collaborative gaming 
experience by bonding resources across 
different network domains. 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  37  
translators, translate the journalist to different languages and generate the corresponding subtitles/capti ons. The 
audience can select a camera, a language or the original sound which are perfectly synchronous when playing and 
switching the remotely generated live streams. 
 
 
 
Technological KPIs to be validated 
Use Case KPIs 
Data Rate 
(Mbps) 
Mobility 
(Km/h) 
Latency 
(ms) 
Density 
(Devices per 
m²) 
Reliability 
(%) 
Coverage 
(%) 
QoE (MOS) 
UC 4.1  <1000 <100 <100 >1 >99.99 >99.9 >4.3 
UC 4.2  >100 <1 <50 >10-2 >99 >99 >4.3 
UC 4.3  <1000 <1 <50 >1 >99 >95 >4.3 
UC 4.4  >100 <100 <100 >1 >95 >99.9 >4.3 
UC 4.5  <200 <1 <10 >0.1 >99 >99 >4.3 
UC 4.6  <1000 <100 <50 >0.1 >99.99 >95 >4.3 
 
 
Introduction 
One of the challenges of 5G is to validate its technological and business 
performance across all sets of heterogeneous requirements stemming from 
concurrent usage of network resources by different vertical domains. In this 
respect, relevant field trials will be conducted concurrently with multiple vertical 
use cases grouped over the three separate classes of ITU requirements (eMBB, 
mMTC and URLLC). The purpose is to validate and capture evidence through 
the relevant performance KPIs t o what extent slicing a nd virtualisation are 
capable of successfully managing multi -domain resources,  and how these 
capabilities are in line with such concurrent performance requirements and also, 
that there is no interference between vertical use cases in the presence of concurrent usage of resources  (i.e. 
strict isolation is maintained) . To support network slice management , dynamic service lifecycle automation and 
enable automatic real -time and concurrent orchestration across the 5G-EVE and 5G -VINNI facilities, the CDSO 
based on NOKIA’s CBND will be leveraged, to bind all 5G-related services to be piloted and to control their flows.  
 
Therefore, this LL leverages, combines and executes in a combined and concurrent manner those use cases from 
LL1-LL4 whose target KPI requirements (i.e. high throughput, low latency, high density of devices) fall under 
such classes of service  as outlined in Table 1.6 . In particular , each of the  service classes SC5.1-SC5.3 will 
incorporate the parallel execution of a number of use cases in each of the LLs. All service classes (SC5.1-SC5.3) will 
then be executed concurrently within each ICT-17 facility. In addition, a LL4 use case (e.g. UC 4.3) will be executed 
across 5G -VINNI Norway and Patra  facilities to demonstrate cross -border multi-site capabilities, including the 
triggering and handling of end-to-end value-added connectivity on-demand. 
 
 
 
 
Test Objectives Requirements Participants 
▪ Measure latency, 
throughput and QoE 
that can be achieved 
when cooperative 
media production 
applications are 
installed and used.  
▪ Estimate the impact 
of the cloud and 
various RANs. 
▪ Synchronise live and on-demand 
streams based on NTP protocol/out-
of-band communications. 
▪ RTSP, RTMP servers to provide 
ultra-low latency live contents. 
▪ Timestamped players compatible 
with RTSP flows and WebRTC 
players. 
▪ 5G-VINNI Patra ICT-17 facility 
availability. 
▪ FNET and LIVEU and will provide all the 
required server and client applications, live 
video contribution systems, content and 
support.  
▪ UOP will provide the 5G-VINNI Patra facility 
▪ CTTC will design novel intra-slicing network 
schemes, capable of handling different 
content types (e.g., eMBB for streaming and 
URLLC for synchronised subtitles) in order to 
optimize the production of cooperative media. 
Multi Living Lab (MLL): Multi-vertical concurrent usage of eMM, mMTC & URLLC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  38  
Table 1.8: Overview of the concurrent UCs to be demonstrated in the three classes of ITU requirements 
Use Case SC 5.1 
eMBB 
SC 5.2 
mMTC 
SC 5.3 
URLLC 
LL1: Factories of the Future 
UC 1.1 Time-critical process optimisation inside digital factory C2 C2 C2 
UC 1.2 Non time-critical communication inside factory - C2 - 
UC 1.3 Remotely controlling digital factories C2 - C2 
UC 1.4 Connected goods -  C2 
UC 1.5 Rapid deployment, auto/re-configuration and testing of new robots B2 B2 B2 
LL2: Smart Energy 
UC 2.1 Industrial Demand Side Management - - A1 
UC 2.2 Electric Vehicle Smart Charging - - A1 
UC 2.3 Electric network frequency stability - - A1 
LL3: Smart Cities & Ports 
UC 3.1 Intelligent street lighting - B1 - 
UC 3.2 Smart parking  - B2 - 
UC 3.3 Smart city co-creation B2 B2 B2 
UC 3.4 Smart buildings – smart campus C3 C3 C3 
UC 3.5 Autonomous assets and logistics for smart harbour/port B2 B2 B2 
UC 3.6 Port safety: Monitor & detect irregular noise B2 B2 B2 
LL4: Media & Entertainment 
UC 4.1 Ultra High-Fidelity Media C1 C1 - 
UC 4.2 Multi CDN selection C1 - - 
UC 4.3 On-site Live Event Experience B1, C1 B1, C1 - 
UC 4.4 User Generated & Machine Generated Content C1 C1 - 
UC 4.5 Immersive and Integrated Media and Gaming C1 C1 C1 
UC 4.6 Cooperative Media Production C1 C1 - 
A1= 5G-EVE Turin by TIM; B1= 5G-VINNI Norway; B2= remote 5G RAN node by TNOR connected to 5G-VINNI Norway; 
C1=5G-VINNI Patra; C2= 5G private node by UOP; C3=remote 5G RAN node by UOP connected to 5G-VINNI Patra 
 
Context – Business Situation & Drivers  
As Europe aims to become a leader in 5G network deployment from 2020 onwards, the challenge is to identify which 
is the best context to launch 5G services. This context will include eMBB, mMTC and URLLC services, as currently 
being standardised within 3GPP and ITU. Moreover, commercial launches require a close collaboration between the 
telecom sector and the different vertical industries in order to achieve the scale and the return on investment for 5G42. 
It is important that concurrent usage of network resources by different vertical  domains can be demonstrated in 
realistic and relevant field trials , to validated efficient and flexible resource utili sation while ensuring SLAs and 
predictable QoE. 
 
Solution – Technology Perspective 
Vertical industries address their connectivity and communication requirements with dedicated specific solutions. 5G 
technologies, slicing and virtualisation , will provide a common base that delivers an open, cost -efficient and 
interoperable eco-system enabling a solution platform for the different verticals. 5G must also cater in an economical 
way the diverse requirements and business needs of a multitude of verticals. In addition, 5G infrastructure and 
architecture will integrate heterogeneous technologies  and enable network slicing, so that the multiple concurrent 
execution of vertical operational services is performed regardless of their diverse requirements. Therefore, in this 
multi LL (MLL), the relevant use cases will be demonstrated while ensuring performance and KPIs according to the 
following three Service Classes (SC 5.1, SC 5.2 & SC 5.3) as they will be executed in parallel and concurrently 
over the ICT-17 facilities (A1, B1-B3, C1-C3) as listed in Table 1.8.  
 
Main Participants and their role:  
The main participants of this MLL are listed in the respective use cases of the verticals in LL1-LL4. 
 
 
                                                 
42 https://ec.europa.eu/transparency/regdoc/rep/1/2016/EN/1-2016-588-EN-F1-1.PDF  
 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  39  
Service Class (SC) 5.1: Enhanced Mobile Broadband (eMBB) 
eMBB aims to satisfy people’s increasing demand for a digital lifestyle focusing on services with high bandwidth 
requirements43. Thus, as the demand for mobile broadband will continue to rise enhanced mobile broadband becomes 
critical. The eMBB SC involves a number of use cases from LL1-LL4 requiring high data rates and traffic volumes. 
In this scenario, different cases with different requirements, including wide -area coverage (low density areas) and 
hotspot (very high-density areas, such as Patra carnivals in 2021 & 2022), are also covered.  
 
Test Objectives Requirements  Key Players 
To validate through relevant target KPIs  
the stringent requirements for use cases 
involving peak and high user experienced 
data rates  (>100Mbps) in heterogeneous 
environments in a concurrent environment 
with multiple verticals  in both low and 
high-density areas 
▪ Operational readiness of 5G-VINNI Norway & 
Patra facilities, and NTNU Manulab  
▪ CDSO to enable service orchestration, provisioning 
and lifecycle management automation 
▪ Complementary communication channels for 
accessing remote services based on high speed 
broadband connection  
Actors 
involved in 
UCs as per 
Table 1.6, 
described in 
LL1-LL4  
 
 
Service Class (SC) 5.2: Massive Machine Type Communication (mMTC) 
The mMTC SC involves a number of use cases from LL1 -LL5 requiring high numbers of devices (e.g. >106) per 
km2  being either stationary or at high speeds (up to 100km/h). Additionally, this service class requires a large number 
of connected devices that transmit a low volume of non-delay sensitive data. Devices need to be low cost and have 
long battery life44.  
 
Test Objectives Requirements  Key Players 
To validate through relevant target KPIs the 
requirements for high connection density of 
devices, being either stationary or  at high 
mobility in a concurrent environment with 
multiple other verticals 
▪ Operational readiness of 5G-EVE Turin 
facility 
▪ CDSO to enable cross-domain service 
orchestration, provisioning and lifecycle 
management automation 
Actors involved in 
UCs as per Table 
1.6, described in 
LL1-LL4 
 
Service Class (SC) 5.3: Ultra-Reliable Low-Latency Communications (URLLC) 
The URLLC SC seeks to meet the demanding expectation of the digital industry concentrating on latency -sensitive 
services such as those listed in the FoF and Media & Entertainment Living Labs. The URLLC service class involves 
a number of use cases from LL1 -LL4 as listed in Table 1.6 that require low E2E latencies  (e.g. <1ms), high 
positioning accuracy (<0.5m) and/or high reliability (>99.999%), which will be demonstrated in both low and 
high-density areas.  
 
Test Objectives Requirements  Key Players 
To validate through relevant target KPIs  the 
stringent requirements for use cases involving 
ultra-low latencies, high -reliability and 
positing accuracy in heterogeneous 
environments in a concurrent environment with 
multiple verticals  
▪ Operational readiness of 5G-VINNI 
Norway & Patra facilities, and NTNU 
Manulab 
▪ CDSO to enable service orchestration, 
provisioning and lifecycle management 
automation 
Actors involved in 
UCs as per Table 
1.6, described in 
LL1-LL4  
 
 
KPIs to be validated 
The target KPI values to be validated in MLL are those included in each use case as listed in Table 1.6. 
 
1.3.5 Gender Analysis 
The 5G-SOLUTIONS consortium supports that ‘an in-depth understanding of men and women's needs, behaviours 
and attitudes can improve the scientific quality and societal relevance of the produced knowledge, technology and/or 
innovation’45. As such, it also leads to produce goods and services better suited to potential markets, an aspect 
particularly important for 5G-SOLUTIONS, which is geared towards a commercialisation roadmap and trajectory. 
 
The 5G-SOLUTIONS consortium acknowledges the gender imperatives as stated in the EU regulation 1291/2013 of 
11/12/2013 establishing Horizon 2020 and is committed to participate in promoting equality between women and 
men in research and innovation. The consortium wholeheartedly supports the objectives of the framework programme 
on gender balance. However, acknowledging that there are currently significantly more men than women in the 5G 
industry, in 5G-SOLUTIONS, as part of the management of the project,  attention and effort with be put towards 
                                                 
43 http://www.huawei.com/minisite/hwmbbf16/insights/5G-Nework-Architecture-Whitepaper-en.pdf  
44 https://www.itu.int/dms_pubrec/itu-r/rec/m/R-REC-M.2083-0-201509-I!!PDF-E.pdf  
45 Vademecum on Gender Equality in Horizon 2020 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  40  
ensuring a gender balance at all levels ( General Assembly, planned research activities, Living Labs, External 
Advisory Board, etc). We are committed to incorporating sex and gender analyses, where relevant, to the engineering 
of the 5G -SOLUTIONS system and use cases. We recognise that t he end-users of the system and use cases have 
different characteristics (gender identities, sex, age, ethnicity, profession, occupation, education, income, household 
and living arrangements, familiarity with and attitudes towards technology, etc.) and the role that the gender plays 
with regards to the developing technologies and services will be analysed 46. 5G-SOLUTIONS will pay attention to 
basic physiological differences between females and males (e.g. in vision, hearing, voice pitch, etc.) when it comes 
to measuring Quality of Experience . Through task 10.5 in WP10 we will study and report on the differences of 
perception and reaction to the  usage of the use cases  based on gender in view of incorporating the necessary 
requirements in the design of the system and monitor their implementation. In terms of usage, the research and 
innovation will certainly benefit both men and women equally, either as direct or indirect end -users. Alhough we 
acknowledge that most application developers are men, an effort will be made through the project to encourage, 
where possible, the inclusion of women in an effort to contribute to wider initiatives on encouraging women to 
embrace digital and ICT careers. In addition, given that our field trials are planned in heterogeneous sectors, we shall 
consider gender specificities in each sector . For example , although women make up ~47% of the labor force,  the 
majority (73%) of the engineering workforce in manufacturing plants are men47, which is relevant for Living Lab 1. 
Therefore, there is a need to grasp the differential effects that the development of the 5G-SOLUTIONS system and 
use cases will have on these particular groups of men and women. By doing so, the project hopes to meet previously 
unmet needs or even open new markets for applications in the industries relevant to 5G-SOLUTIONS (i.e. Industry 
4.0, Energy, Smart Cities & Ports, Media & Entertainment) that would be better adapted to actors in these domains. 
 
During the requirements gathering (task T1.1) and at the Living Lab field trials, we will ensure that the expectations 
of different groups of potential end-users are captured and will sex-disaggregate the data, as per the recommendations 
of the EIGE 48, to find out whe ther different expectations regarding the interfaces, features , functionality etc., exist 
based on gender . 5G-SOLUTIONS will also ensure gender balance in the conduct of primary research , at project 
team and decision-making levels, as well as in end-user participation in the Living Lab field trials and the audience 
of its capacity building 
programme. In addition, 
the human factors 
portion of the analysis in 
the Living Lab use cases 
will include an attention 
to the different patterns 
of participati on, 
involvement, behaviour 
and activities that women and men display in relation to the use cases and the implications of these differences. Our 
commitment to foster and secure gender balance through and thanks to the project is illustrated by the statisti cs 
indicated in Figure 1.10.  
 
1.3.6 Inter-disciplinary approaches and stakeholder knowledge 
5G-SOLUTIONS adopts an  inter-disciplinary approach, integrating info, data, techniques, tools , methodologies 
and concepts from diverse technolog ies, engineering and innovation disciplines and ethics, to assess the emerging 
technologies and further develop their application . The inter -disciplinary elements to be integrated , as outlined in 
Section 1.3, include cross-network service orchestration, 5G service cycle automation, leveraging 5G radio and core 
network facilities from ICT-17, and high-performance cloud computing, cognitive machine learning techniques and 
big data analytics, enabling the engagement of f ive vertical industries for the testing of numerous innovative 
heterogeneous use cases with a strong commercialisation potential and ethical added value and social acceptance. 
The adopted inter-disciplinary elements will enable the effective and efficient monitoring, presentation and validation 
of reference KPIs in (near) real-time using privacy preserving mechanisms with GDPR in mind.  The project’s 
consortium has the relevant expertise (as evidenced in Section 4) to carry out the interdisciplinary aspects of the 
project, integrating knowledge from several stakeholders beyond academic disciplines as follows:  
▪ by leveraging and/or advancing assets and results from involvement in Phase 1 -3 projects in which several 
consortium partners have been engaged, such TIM, TNOR, NOKIA, LMI, IBM, CTTC, NURO, IRT, UOP, WIT, 
as outlined in Table 1.3; 
▪ by leveraging the expertise from NOKIA through the use of their CBND Network Director to build the necessary 
plugins to enable cross-domain service orchestration; 
                                                 
46 http://genderedinnovations.stanford.edu/methods/engineering_checklist.html  
47 https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/us/Documents/manufacturing/us-mfg-women-in-manufacturing-2015-study.pdf  
48 http://eige.europa.eu/gender-equality-index/about  
Figure 1.10: 5G-SOLUTIONS Gender statistics 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  41  
▪ by leveraging expertise from IBM (cognitive platform and algorithms), APPART (telco analytics), EBOS (front-
end dashboards and APIs) and integrating it into the design of the technological enablers; 
▪ by directly involving end-user actors (both industrial, such a s PGBS, GLAN, ENEL, IREN, YARA, FNET, 
LIVEU, as well as end-consumers) whose new innovative services will be validated in the field trials;  
▪ by involving legal and ethics organisations (e.g. CEL, PIIU).
1.4 Ambition 
The limitations of the existing state of the art 4G technology mean that new value-added services and novel business 
models that have stringent requirements for the network, cannot currently be exploited by vertical industries. The 
ambition of 5G -SOLUTIONS is to demonstrate the viability of such services and business models in a pre -
commercial, industrial setting.  We will achieve this by validating key KPIs, with differentiated performance 
requirements, and with concurrent usage of resources by multiple verticals, as elaborated in Section 1.3.4.1. This, in 
turn, will provide extensive and valuable feedback to the broader industry towards standardisation and operational 
readiness of both their next generation infrastructures and technologies before wide commercial deployments of 5G 
mobile networks throughout Europe.  5G-SOLUTIONS will also develop collaboration models from the outset to 
ensure enhanced cooperation with 5G -PPP projects and Working Groups. These will take account of existing 
technology solutions coming from projects , as well as the latest white papers and joint demos emerging from the 
Working Groups. It is envisaged that these will be advanced during formal Steering Board and Technology Board 
meetings, in addition to bilateral engagement between projects/Working Groups.  
 
1.4.1 Advancing the state-of-the-art 
5G will bring new unique service capabilities for consumers and industrial stakeholders from vertical industries. As 
an enabler, 5G will ensure user experience continuity in challenging situations, regardless of the users’ presence 
either in a highly dense area or whilst being at high-speed or even at remote locations. A number of metrics depending 
on the nature of the service, such as high throughput, low-latency, energy efficiency, reliability, servicing a massive 
number of objects are important for the successful delivery of the next generation of services. 5G -SOLUTIONS 
involves appropriate vertical industry users to demonstrate pre-commercial trials in 20 innovative use case services 
in Living Labs and over 5 vertical domains, arranged in such a way so as to address the three different types of 
traffic profiles for eMBB, URLLC and mMTC in a separate and/or concurrent manner. Furthermore, it will validate 
the technological performance conforming to target 5G KPIs specified as well as the business potential for 
each use case, directly involving end -user actors (industrial and consumers) and taking into consideration high -
density locations and concurrent multi-vertical usage of network resources. In addition to the innovation brought by 
the novel use cases, the following technological enablers complement 5G-SOLUTIONS innovation concept: 
 
1. Unified Cross-Domain Service Orchestration (CDSO) enabling dynamic service lifecycle automation  
Current Status: To justify, capitalise and provide a return on 5G investment, telecom operators need a solid 
business case with 5G service lifecycle automation ( i.e. zero-touch automation) that leads not only to opex 
reduction but also to revenue-producing services. So, in order for 5G to advance, it has to be justified and proven 
with revenue and profit capabilities. 
 
Limitations/Challenges: Although network slicing and virtualisation may be agile, they are not operationally 
simple as they have to be integrated operationally with the rest of the elements of the services being created and 
supported. Therefore, 5G dynamic service lifecycle automation is required to be able to improve and promote 
operational efficiency and versatility, otherwise many of the benefits of network slicing and virtualisation will 
not be fully supported since they will not be managed efficiently. 
 
Progress Beyond State -of-the-Art: 5G-SOLUTIONS will exploit zero-touch automation mechanisms  in 
NOKIA’s CBND to address this issue, so as to have all operational processes and tasks executed automatically. 
Cloudband is an ETSI NFV MANO carrier -grade service orchestrator with commercially proven reliability, 
automation, repeatability and security. 5G-SOLUTIONS will leverage this technology to support multi-domain 
management of resources, above and beyond the ETSI MANO, as well as the automatic real-time E2E cross-
domain provisioning of services across various  and heterogeneous 5G ICT-17 facilities from diff erent 
vendors. Since NOKIA’s CBND  can be flexibly deployed for any combination of NFV Infrastructure / 
Virtualised Infrastructure Manager (NFVI/VIM) and VNF Manager, it can serve VNFs from multiple 5G 
infrastructure vendors49. This makes it simple to host, orchestrate, automate, and manage virtual ised network 
functions and services, whilst benefiting from open -source innovation, making it a perfect candidate for 
facilitating the demonstration and testing of multiple and diverse service trials across heterogeneous 5G testbeds. 
 
                                                 
49 https://networks.NOKIA.com/products/cloudband?s_cid=smm2013_tmc0593_ar  
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  42  
2. Novel value-added concept for the development of a smart KPI visualisation system 
Current Status: In 5G there are significant and complex performance -reporting requirements based on the 
softwarisation and virtualisation of network resources. Existing performance-reporting systems require offline 
post-processing of data due to the huge volume of data collected that needs to be analysed. However, this is 
cumbersome and time consuming whilst being in the field since iterations and adjustments need to be made onsite 
during field trials.  
 
Limitations/Challenges: This ultimately requires (near) real-time KPI reporting and benchmarking of results 
based on a hierarchy of complex decision -making techniques that analyse historical , temporal, frequency and 
real-time network data. 
 
Progress Beyond State-of-the-Art: 5G-SOLUTIONS will deploy a KPI visualisation system, designed and built 
within the scope of this project, which will be an intelligent E2E mobile network high-performance data analysis 
and reporting system. It will be implemented as a web-based service in the cloud, to help verify the performance 
and validate network and subscriber-based KPIs in different industry use cases in near real-time from several 
locations. The time gap between the actual event and the parsing to feedback test case results is estimated to be 
in the order of a few seconds, and hence is a significant advancement , which will incentivise and accelerate 
complex 5G validation. 
The processing of data feeds from various ICT-17 facilities, will also allow the results to be visualised in a 
graphical form through an intuitive dashboard against the thresholds predefined by the target KPI values, 
as specified by the 5G-PPP expert groups and other standardisation bodies. The cognitive analytics approach 
is proposed for rapid and automated analysis of the vast amount of data, wherein the use of machine learning 
techniques implements self-awareness, self-optimisation, self-healing and self-protecting methodologies 
enabling cognitive performance reporting in near real-time. 
This technology is required for managing a demanding infrastructure comprising multiple stakeholder needs in 
the present and for other 5G actors in the future. Novelty arises from the fact that no one yet has solved the 
scalability and flexibility needs for 5G networks in the context of vertical validation, parallelism, scale, 
heterogeneity and near real-time needs as defined by 5G-SOLUTIONS. 
 
3. Open-standards easy-to-use APIs for promoting and supporting openness for new applications 
Current Status: The introduction of vertical industries use cases in 5G networks imposes major architectural 
changes to current mobile networks, so as to concurrently support a diverse variety of stringent requirements. In 
addition, 5G should pave the way for a larger number of partnerships and Business to Business to Customers 
(B2B2C) business models through APIs deployed at different levels (assets, connectivity, enablers)50. 
 
Limitations/Challenges: Multi-access Edge Computing (MEC) is widely accepted as a key technology in order 
to enable ultra-low-latency requirements, as well as a rich computing environment for value-added services closer 
to end users 51. However, implementing MEC is in its infan cy and its deployment in vertical industries and 
commercial settings requires significant effort, not least in the context of viable business models. Incorporating 
standards in this environment is also a current bottleneck. 
 
Progress Beyond State -of-the-Art: 5G-SOLUTIONS will develop external interfaces and APIs, at both 
management, application, measurement and orchestration levels, based on the latest open standards, such as the 
ETSI MEC ISG52, ETSI NFV and Open source MANO (OSM). These will support openness, interworking and 
integration with 3 rd parties, and strengthen the engagement with 3 rd party developers, vendors and service 
providers. The consortium technological partners will ultimately exploit such interfaces for their value-added 5G 
application propositions. This will create a  standardised, open environment for efficient and seamless 
integration and interworking of applications from such actors across multi-vendor computing platforms at the 
edge of the mobile networks.  
 
1.4.2 Innovation Potential  
5G-SOLUTIONS comprises considerable innovation potential, which we now outline in terms of  Unique Value 
Propositions (UVPs) as shown below: 
 
UVP1: Increase use-case participation and validate multi-perspective KPIs in LLs through end-users 
5G-SOLUTIONS brings together a large set of interdisciplinary partners with different expertise areas ranging from 
the telecom industry (operators and vendors), thematically diverse and complementary vertical  domain experts, 
industrial leaders, SMEs, academia and research organisations. Partners from different vertical sectors will ensure an 
                                                 
50 https://5g-ppp.eu/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/5G-Vision-Brochure-v1.pdf  
51 https://futurenetworks.ieee.org/tech-focus/december-2017/multi-access-edge-computing-overview-of-etsi  
52 https://5g.ieee.org/tech-focus/december-2017/multi-access-edge-computing-overview-of-etsi  
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  43  
interdisciplinary approach is inherent in the project since verticals such as energy and media will naturally have 
diverse technology and business -model requirements. A wide set of heterogeneous 5G representative use cases 
spanning across five vertical industries will be demonstrated in a complementary way. The use case scenarios 
identified and described in 5G -SOLUTIONS arise directly from vertical partners. All use cases, which are highly 
innovative from 5 significant  industry vertical domains, have a high commercialisation potential , require 5G 
performance capabilities and will be demonstrated with end-user actors in Living Labs, both separately as well 
as concurrently. The validation of separate 5G KPI sets in such key use cases will be addressed simultaneously from 
two perspectives: the technological perspective, brou ght into the project by the technological experts, and the 
business-centric perspective introduced by directly engaging end -users in the Living Lab s. This validation will 
ultimately boost the adoption of new, improved, compelling and innovative applications to the end-users. 
 
UVP2: Integrated semantic cutting-edge technologies to reduce fragmentation 
Acknowledging that even though each of the following sectors is at the cutting-edge of its technology and that there 
are multiple initiatives that promote each one of them, including 5G-PPP projects, still they are addressed separately 
and not in an interrelated and integrated environment. Hence, 5G -SOLUTIONS will integrate the following in a 
unified environment: 
▪ High-impact vertical use cases with a  high future business potential in end -user driven thematic Living Labs 
based on Factories of the Future, Smart Energy, Smart Cities, Smart Ports and Media & Entertainment. 
▪ Open-standards easy -to-use application-layer intent -based APIs for promoting and su pporting openness in 
developing new vertical applications by 3rd parties. 
▪ Network slicing and E2E cross-network service orchestration, provisioning and management of shared resources 
across different 5G vendor infrastructures, including dynamic service lifecycle automation. 
▪ Cognitive AI and machine learning  big-data analytics and cloud -computing to automate the analysis and the 
presentation of the KPIs against target values in (near) real-time thus producing results during the field trials. 
 
UVP3: Open standards Cross-Domain Service Orchestrator (CDSO) 
A unified CDSO based on automation enabling multi-domain slicing and 5G service lifecycle automation will cater 
for the multi tenancy needs supporting network slicing imperatives, so as to enable automatic real-time provisioning 
across heterogeneous 5G testbeds. This will be realised by using and extending an existing proven E2E service 
orchestrator (NOKIA’s CBND), enhancing it with new plugins to enable its integration with the 5G ICT-17 facilities, 
as well as improve operational efficiency and versatility in network slicing and virtualisation. This will enable 
the validation of key sets of 5G KPIs in diverse vertical use cases in an automated way. 
 
UVP4: Accelerate the development of 5G technologies towards commercial deployment 
5G-SOLUTIONS is in direct support of 5G -PPP’s aspiration to see new connected digital markets, and contributes 
to the EC’s broader industry digitisation and policy objectives in support of the Digital Singl e Market, maintaining 
Europe’s leadership position in mobile telecommunications. 5G -SOLUTIONS will accelerate the development of 
5G technologies out of the R&D phase and towards commercial deployment by providing valuable feedback to the 
5G industry. Thus 5G-SOLUTIONS will ensure 5G products and services will be able to cope with the market’s 
requirements. 
 
UVP5: Supporting openness, enhancing knowledge and fostering collaboration  
5G-SOLUTIONS’s intention is to open source the majority of the innovation an d technology advancements with a 
view to increasing Europe’s innovation capacity. In this respect, and further to the open access to research data and 
to all scientific publications to be produced, a comprehensive set of open-standards easy-to-use APIs will be designed 
and developed, including northbound application APIs for facilitating the development, portability and provisioning 
of new user-friendly 5G applications and solutions by SMEs. These APIs will become one of the key facilitators of 
5G technology, supporting the digital transformation underway in enterprises and industry verticals, enabling them 
to prosper in multi-dimensioned business ecosystems.  
 
The project will also result in a stronger, more competitive and innovative telecommunications industry fostering 
cooperation between key actors including research, academic institutions and end -users. 5G -SOLUTIONS 
members will have the opportunity to intersect in important aspects of actual field test trials, as well as partner in 
use cases that promise to have substantial research and commercialisation potential, with the support of domain 
experts in the 5G technology space. 5G -SOLUTIONS members will also have the opportunity  to build early 
knowledge and competences for their respective organisations, in turn accelerating growth of knowledge, expertise 
and a valuable network of partners to help accelerate their progress in a growth area where 5G is anticipated to have 
a multi-billion Euro impact for industry, clients, partners, end users etc., on a global scale.  
 
 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  44  
Section 2: Impact
2.1 Expected impacts  
 
The challenge of providing solid impact analysis is crucial for all the actors in the 5G value chain, starting from 
vertical industries and SMEs . In fact, all these stakeholders can bring together the necessary set of expertise, 
expectations, solutions, and strategies for the operational roll-out of 5G services in the market. As all worldwide 5G 
programs and initiatives  have acknowledged, 5G technologies will not be deployed and adopted without a 
compelling demand by a wide set of business cases expressed by leaders of vertical markets. We are currently 
at the turning point in history when the 5G usability is being demon strated, and when its full success or failure is 
determined.  
 
As shown in Figure 2.1, the expected outcomes of the project, measured through the achievement of relevant 
technological, business, dissemination and communication KPIs as defined by the vertic al industries, will generate 
impact in the 5G domain.  
 
 
Figure 2.1: 5G-SOLUTIONS delivering Impact from Objectives 
 
5G-SOLUTIONS aims at maximising the impact to the realisation of the 5G Vision by conducting advanced field 
trials representing key segments of the 5G market in complementary and combined ways in order to demonstrate and 
prove the capabilities of the 5G technology. Such domains, identified in Factories of the Future, Smart Energy, Smart 
Cities, Smart Ports and Media & Entertainment, as of 201 7, collectively represent ~46%53 of the European Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP). 5G-SOLUTIONS is therefore likely to generate business and economic impact in key 
economic sectors, as well as accelerate 5G network deployment that would transform many aspects of the life of 
European citizens, e.g. the way they work, entertain themselves, etc. In addition, the project will endorse a business 
analysis, based on  the Living Labs ecosystem approach. As an impact paradigm, the business model that 5G -
SOLUTIONS will follow is the open innovation one. This paradigm developed in recent years is particularly suited 
to the 5G context, both for the virtualisation approach of the network as well as for the possibility of having a strong 
impact on future developers and especially on SMEs. 
 
The 5G-SOLUTIONS consortium will endorse the idea to advance further the telco industries from the classic value 
chain model to a more innovative one; through the employment of its open source components, the project will impact 
the business with a sustainable community of SMEs and institutions, both collaborating and/or competing, 
whilst creating value for customers and end-users. The dissemination & communication activities (in Section 2.2) 
are geared towards reaching these communities. 
 
                                                 
53 Manufacturing industry: 16%; Smart Energy: 12%; Smart Cities: 10%; Smart Ports: 3%; Media and entertainment: 5%. Sources: 
Mastering digital transformation, Nagy K. Hanna; http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_MEMO-14-193_en.htm ; 
http://ec.europa.eu/research/industrial_technologies/factories-of-the-future_en.html ; 
https://ec.europa.eu/energy/sites/ener/files/documents/20160712_Summary_Ref_scenario_MAIN_RESULTS%20%282%29-web.pdf ; 
www.eurocities.eu/eurocities/issues/cohesion-policy-issue&newsstart=21&newscount=10&contentURL=cohesion-policy-issue . 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  45  
2.1.1 Expected Impacts set out in the Work Programme 
5G-SOLUTIONS contribution to the expected impacts as set out in the ICT-19-2019 call are detailed in Table 2.1a. 
 
Table 2.1a: 5G-SOLUTIONS contribution to the expected impacts from the call text 
Expected Impact 1: Validated core 5G technologies and architectures in the context of specific vertical use cases 
and deployment scenarios, from high to low density regions. (Linked to project’s Objectives 1-3). 
5G-SOLUTIONS will contribute to this impact by means of directly engaging end-users as participants in vertical 
Living Labs demonstrating in the field that the 5G disruptive performance capabilities and flexibility enable the 
offering of realistic, innovative and advanced service scenarios  over key vertical domains (i.e. Factories of the 
Future, Smart Energy, Smart Cities, Smart Ports and Media/Entertainment) in a complementary way. The use case 
scenarios covered in 5G -SOLUTIONS have been carefully selected as they require 5G performance 
capabilities. These scenarios will be demonstrated with expert vertical stakeholders in Living Labs, validating both 
the core 5G technologies and architectures (e.g. 5G NR, network slicing, slice lifecycle automation, SDN/NFV, 
Multi-access Edge Computing (MEC), softwarisation, management and orchestration) of the underlying 5G end-
to-end ICT-17 infrastructure s, together with  their corresponding technological performance in conforming to 
target 5G KPIs specified per use case. Both low and high-density locations (e.g. encompassing a large number of 
devices and users) will be used in order to validate them credibly under realistic conditions.  
 
To demonstrate the progress towards the achievement of th e Expected Impact 1, the following indicators will be 
considered and measured after each iteration cycle  of 5G-SOLUTIONS Phase 3  as outlined in Table 1.4  in 
Section 1.3.4 and documented in deliverables D4.3-D7.3: 
Expected Impact 1 
Indicators 
Technology and 
architecture relevance Target values with respect to 4G 
Infrastructure High, System level 
5G-NR, network slicing, virtuali sation, MEC, cross -
domain orchestrator operating in an integrated manner  
capable of jointly supporting the use cases in the LLs 
including their target KPI values (see Section 1.3.4.1)  
Data volume Medium, System level Peak terminal data rate >1 Gbps for inside offices 
Peak of 750 Gbps per geographical area  
Device density High, RAN level 1000-fold more reaching a density >1 million devices/km2 
Service deployment 
time High, system level 1000-fold less, reaching a complete deployment of <90 min 
  
Expected Impact 2: Validated core technologies and architecture for differentiated performance requirements 
originating from eMBB, mMTC, URLLC use cases, notably for end to end slicing and virtualisation. (Linked to 
project’s Objectives 1-3). 
Through the interaction with renowned industry vertical stakeholders, a number of innovative use cases have been 
identified in key vertical industries. Many of these use cases are variations of a subset of basic 5G service classes 
(eMBB, mMTC and URLLC), w hich have been consolidated and agreed to be covered in the context of 5G -PPP 
and different Standards Developing Organisations ( SDOs). Network slicing and virtualisation aim for building 
dedicated logical networks that exhibit functional architectures cust omised to the respective tel ecommunication 
services over such service classes. Therefore, 5G-SOLUTIONS will practically demonstrate fine-grained end-
to-end network-slicing and virtualisation and its impact on user experience and network performance, will b e 
evaluated under various traffic conditions, through an agile -based iterative process  as outlined in Section 1.3.4 . 
Results and lessons learned will be documented in reports in each Living Lab (deliverables D4.2-D7.2) with relevant 
recommendation/best practices derived from the experience gained on network slicing and virtualisation. 
In LL1-LL4 (i.e. covering separately each of the vertical industries in the Factories of the Future, Smart Energy, 
Smart Cities, Smart Ports and Media/Entertainment) the differentiated performance requirements of 5G will be 
validated and in MLL, the performance and flexibility of the 5G facilities will be validated during concurrent 
multi-vertical usage of resources by multi-tenants. In particular, the architecture and network slicing will monitor 
and dynamically adapt the resources to the required demand to achieve network slice efficiency. 
 
To demonstrate the progress towards the achievement of the Expected Impact 2, the following indicators will be 
considered and assessed with respect to 5G architecture relevance after each iteration cycle of 5G-SOLUTIONS 
Phase 3 as explained in Section 1.3.4 and documented in deliverables D4.3-D7.3: 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  46  
Expected Impact 2 
Indicators 
Technology and architecture 
relevance 
Target values with respect to 4G 
Network slicing Fundamental concept Meet target KPI values of Table 1.6 during 
infrastructure, spectrum and RAN sharing and 
network slicing. 
Multi tenancy & 
flexibility Fundamental concept 
Traffic type Medium, RAN and system level 
User data rate Medium, RAN and front/backhaul 
level 
Guaranteed user data rates >50Mbps  
 
Latency High, RAN and system level 10-fold less (<1ms) with less than 10% jitter 
Reliability High, management level >99.999% for LL1 & LL2 services 
Positioning accuracy High, RAN and system level <1m for outdoor devices 
 
Expected Impact 3 : Viable business models for innovative digital use cases tested and validated across a 
multiplicity of industrial sectors, including demonstration of required network resource control from the vertical 
industry business model perspective. (Linked to project’s Objective 4).  
All use cases in 5G-SOLUTIONS have been carefully selected as they are expected by their respective vertical 
industry leaders to have a high future commercialisation potential and 5G relevance. As part of task T8.2 under 
WP8, business development plans will be developed  over 3 clusters of services , i.e. (i) Industry 4.0 covering 
Factories of the Future use cases, (ii) Smart Urban Environment covering Smart Energy, Smart Cities and Smart 
Ports use cases and (iii) Enhanced User Experience , covering Media & Ent ertainment industrial sectors . These 
business development plans will be fed by end user (industrial and consumers) inputs who will validate the business 
potential of such use cases in the Living Labs. 
 
According to the 5G -PPP Architecture white paper 54 published in January 2018, short service creation, high data 
rates and volumes, device autonomy and identity have been expressed by vertical sector stakeholders, as key for a 
successful commercialisation, and therefore these KPIs will be monitored, measured and benchmarked in each of 
the 3 iteration cycles of field trials and taken into consideration in the business model of each use case.  
 
The business aspect of each of the following UCs will be validated according to the business UC validation 
methodology in Section 1.3.4.1 and the corresponding business metric parameters to be quantified and 
developed in task T1.5  based on cost and risk an alysis. The business validation  of each use case will be 
performed by end -user partners of the consortium, who will directly engage a number of the ir customers for 
subsequently providing feedback for their usefulness, applicability, social acceptability, etc. This is essential to 
evaluate and estimate the level of adoption by the industry and society  so as to enable the service from a 
particular use case to be evolved and be mature enough to add it to the portfolio of the end-user stakeholders.  
 
 
 
 
Expected Impact 3 Indicators Target in 5G-SOLUTIONS 
% of use cases to be included in the business development plans At least 70% 
% of 5G -SOLUTIONS vertical stakeholders incorporating the 
use cases in their product portfolios  
At least 50% 1 year after project completion 
At least 70% 2 years after project completion 
Expected Impact 4: Impactful contributions towards standardisation bodies, involving vertical actors, for what 
concerns the second phase of 5G standardisation. Participation of key European industrial partners with high 
standardisation impact is desired. (Linked to project’s Objective 5). 
5G-SOLUTIONS consortium acknowledges that initiatives to link 5G standardisation and 5G R&I appear to be 
more effective when carried out at the research planning phase. Therefore, as part of WP8, 5G-SOLUTIONS aims 
to achieve impactful contribution on  the 2 nd phase of 5G  standardisation (as outlined in task T8.3) and in 
particular producing the following, relevant to the overall 5G architecture, network softwarisation and slicing, 
network management, use cases and key requirements: 
• A dedicated standardisation action plan, identifying relevant standardisation and regulatory bodies.  
• A roadmap of relevant standardi sation and regulatory bodies  (3GPP, ETSI, ITU, IEEE, IETF, etc.) and 
topics for 5G, including evaluating existing roadmaps at international level; influencing pre-standardisation on 
5G and related R&D, recommending which outcomes should be standard ised; joint actions with international 
fora, such as ONF, GSMA, TMN, Broadband Forum, NGMN, OneM2M, etc. 
• Contribution to 5G-PPP pre-standards WG with at least two (2) white papers  based on the experiences in 
the validation of the use cases over the 5G technologies and addressing gaps with respect to 5G -PPP vision. 
Possible topics include: validation methodologies to compare technol ogies, measurements of achieved KPIs 
values in the LLs, etc.  
                                                 
54 https://5g-ppp.eu/wp-content/uploads/2018/01/5G-PPP-5G-Architecture-White-Paper-Jan-2018-v2.0.pdf  
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  47  
• The 5G-SOLUTIONS consortium includes key European industrial partners with high standardisation power, 
participating in the above stated standardisation bodies: 
• TIM as a NGMN member55 
• TIM, CTTC, TNOR, IRT as 3GPP members56  
• TIM and TNOR as ITU members57  
• TIM, TNOR, NOKIA, IRT, CTTC and WIT as ETSI members58  
• TIM and TNOR as GSMA members59  
• TIM, NOKIA and CTTC as ONF members60  
 
These members have a proven standardisation impact, illustrated also by the number and high quality of their 
contributions within 5G -PPP. Furthermore, TIM, NOKIA, CTTC and TNOR are members of 5G -IA61. These 
organisations are directly involved in the standardisation bodies dealing with the standardisation strategy and 
actions. 5G-IA are Market Representation Partners of the 3GPP62, with the key role to offer market advice to 3GPP 
and to bring into 3GPP a consensus view of market requirements (e.g. services, features and funct ionality) falling 
within the 3GPP scope.  
 
In addition, by establishing an External Advisory Board (EAB), 5G-SOLUTIONS will enhance its standardisation 
power beyond the consortium membership and project’s lifetime. The EAB will adopt policy recommendations and 
coordinate with existing 5G-IA WGs to share issues and formulate recommendations.  
 
Contribution to standardisation, open source communities and actions are further elaborated in Section 2.2.2.  
Expected Impact 5 : Validation of relevant KPIs  with services linked to specific vertical sectors.  (Linked to 
project’s Objective 3). 
Dedicated sets of pre-defined target KPIs per vertical use case , ranging from peak and user -experienced high 
data rates, high traffic volume, low latencies, connection density, energy efficiency, coverage, reliability, 
positioning accuracy and end-user perceived QoS/QoE (see Table 1.6) will be used as a baseline to validate  5G 
technologies and architectures over 20 innovative use cases across 5 Living Labs. 
 
In addition, relevant business related KPIs based also on the 5G -PPP contractual agreement will validated in task 
T1.5 as explained in Section 1.3.4.1. 
 
To demonstrate the progress towards the achievement of the Expected Impact 5, the following indicators will be 
considered and assessed after each iteration cycle of 5G-SOLUTIONS Phase 3 as explained in Section 1.3.4 and 
documented in deliverables D4.3-D7.3: 
 
Expected Impact 5 
Indicators 
Target in 5G-SOLUTIONS 
Time: Core 5G 
technologies and 
architectures as per 
3GPP roadmap 
Successfully validated in each of the 3 iteration cycles, aligned with 3GPP releases as 
indicated in Figure 1.5 meeting the technological KPI values as per Table 1.6:  
• >80% of the pre-defined target KPI values met by M18 in 3GPP Rel.15 
• >85% of the pre-defined target KPI values met by M26 in 3GPP Rel. 16 
• >90% of the pre-defined target KPI values met by M34 in 3GPP beyond Rel. 16 
Effort: Expertise 
and resources  
• At least 25% of vertical stakeholders allocating >80% of their expert resources in 
UC field trials. 
• At least 50% of vertical stakeholders allocating >50% of their expert resources in 
UC field trials. 
  
Expected Impact 6: Europe 5G know how showcasing (Linked to project’s Objective 6). 
The know how gained by the experiences and lessons learned from the Living Lab field trials will be showcased in 
major European conferences . As part of joint dissemination and demonstration activities with 5G -PPP, 5G -
SOLUTIONS consortium partners will arrange industrial workshops, as well as p articipate and demonstrate 5G-
                                                 
55 https://www.ngmn.org/about-us/members.html 
56 https://webapp.etsi.org/3gppmembership/QueryForm.asp 
57 https://www.itu.int/online/mm/scripts/gensel11 
58 https://www.etsi.org/membership/current-members 
59 https://www.gsma.com/membership/who-are-our-gsma-members/full-membership/ 
60 https://www.opennetworking.org/member-listing/  
61 https://5g-ppp.eu/our-members/ 
62 3GPP produces Technical Specifications, to be transposed by relevant Standardisation Bodies (Organisational Partners, such as ETSI, the 
European Telecommunications Standards Institute) into appropriate deliverables (e.g., standards).  
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  48  
SOLUTIONS results  and know how to key international 5G showcasing events. To demonstrate the progress 
towards the achievement of Expected Impact 6, apart from Table 2.8, the following indicators will be considered: 
 
Expected Impact 6 
Indicators 
Target in 5G-SOLUTIONS 
Workshops 
• Establishment of 1 industrial workshop within the 1 st year after project’s start , 2 
industrial workshops within the 2nd year after project’s start and another industrial 
workshop plus a pre-standardisation workshop during the 3rd year of the project. 
Showcasing in major 
international 
exhibitions 
• Participate with an exhibition booth in 2 major international events, such as the 
MWC 2021 and MWC 2022 to demonstrate 5G-SOLUTIONS outcomes. 
• Participate with an exhibition booth in one large professional media exhibition, such 
as the NAB (USA), IBC (USA), BroadcastAsia or CABSAT (Dubai). 
• Participate with presentations by project partners in 6 key international showcasing 
events, such as MWC 2020-2022, Global 5G and EuCNC events in 2020-2022. 
 
 
 
In addition to above impacts, 5G-SOLUTIONS also contributes to impacts expected from cross-cutting priorities of 
Contractual Public-Private Partnerships (cPPPs) and 5G, as shown in Table 2.1b. 
 
Table 2.1b: 5G-SOLUTIONS contribution to cross-cutting priorities from the call text 
5G Contractual Public-Private Partnership (cPPP) 
5G-SOLUTIONS welcomes the Innovation Union63 where world-class science leverages the removal of “obstacles 
to innovation” (improving skills, setting standards, improving time to market), and where the public and private 
sectors work together. In particular, it stands in full support of the 5G-PPP where public and private actors cooperate 
in implementing technological priorities in 5G. 5G-SOLUTIONS participates to this effort by bringing researchers 
and industrial organisations together in a determined and focused consortium. The project plans to link research as 
closely as possible to the needs of the marketplace and service providers, aims to be an exemplar of this in action 
and anticipates that opportunities arising from 5G-SOLUTIONS will have an impact on the EU employment and 
R&D targets, as well as accelerating commercial interest in 5G use cases across multiple industry domains/verticals.  
 
Impact on 5G-PPP 
5G-SOLUTIONS objectives and results are expected to be a key stimulus to the activities of the 5G IA (with many 
of its consortium partners having a primary role in it), of the 5G-PPP at large and as part of the program development 
activities for all the 5G-PPP projects. The following contributions are expected to the major Working Groups (WGs) 
in the 5G PPP ecosystem (5G PPP, 5G IA and Networld2020):  
• 5G IA Trials WG, providing contribution from the results from 5G-SOLUTIONS field trials. 
• 5G PPP Pre-Standardisation WG, stimulating and supporting the bidirectional interactions with 5G Standards 
Developing Organisations (SDOs) as detailed in Section 2.2.2. 
• 5G PPP Spectrum WG, contributing to coordinated EU actions.  
• 5G PPP 5G Architecture WG, contributing to next releases of the 5G PPP architecture, currently at v2.0. 
• 5G PPP SDN / NDF and Network Management & QoS WGs, contributing to the evolution of the software 
network architecture and tools selection based on inputs from the experience in 5G facilities of the project. 
• Networld2020 SME WG, contributing to define engagement strategies towards 5G Trials for SMEs 
developing solutions for the control of the 5G network and the for the vertical applications. 
 
5G-SOLUTIONS consortium members are aware of the contractual commitment of the 5G -PPP as well as the 
organisational structure as described in the 5G-PPP contract and its technical annex. In particular, they acknowledge 
the roles and commitments of the European Commission, the PPP board, the Networld2020 ETP, and the 5G 
Infrastructure Association. 5G -SOLUTIONS consortium members will continue to participate in the 5G -PPP 
Steering and Technical Boards, and participate in a number of WG s that are relevant to the project and contribute 
to their outputs, such as whitepapers, showcases and workshops. Personnel time and funding have been allocated 
in the project budget to take this participation into account through its dissemination channels . In additio n, 
representatives of consortium members participate in the 5G IA Governance and Office  as follows: Chairman of 
the Board, Dr. Colin Willcock ( NOKIA), and Board members: Raffaele de Peppe ( TIM), Håkon Lønsethagen 
(TNOR), Magnus Madfors (LMI) and Miquel Payaró Llisterri (CTTC). Representatives from TIM, NOKIA, LMI, 
WIT, lead the Spectrum, Pre-Standardisation, 5G Architecture, Software Networks, Trials WGs and IMT -2020 
Evaluation Group 5G-PPP WGs and will act as liaisons between the 5G-SOLUTIONS and the WGs. 
 
The various documents and deliverables from the project will be shared with other 5G-PPP projects via the cross-
project collaboration agreement and uploaded to a shared document repository. Alongside the 5G-PPP, the project 
                                                 
63 http://ec.europa.eu/research/innovation-union/index.cfm    
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  49  
will assess impact in other sectorial PPPs, such as for example, the Factories of the Future (FoF), by accommodating 
the outcomes to the 5G-PPP roadmap, in addition to the Sustainable Process Industry through Resource and Energy 
Efficiency (SPIRE) PPP, for which Living Lab 1 is relevant.  
International cooperation 
Three consortium members (NOKIA, LIVEU and TNOR) are from associated countries. Consortium partners will 
participate in international 5G events including EuCNC and Global 5G Events, which bring together the world 5G 
industrial associations: 5G -IA, IMT -2020, 5G -Forum, 5GMF, 5G -Brasil and 5G -Americas. Amongst others , 
relevant stakeholders from Korea and Japan will be reached in such events, acknowledging that within WP2018 -
2019 of ICT-LEIT, Korea and Japan are the targeted countries for international cooperation. Effort and budget have 
been assigned to consortium partners for relevant resource planning (Section 3.4). 
 
2.1.2 How the Expected Impacts set out in the Work Programme will be monitored 
 
The sets of KPIs defined in each Living Lab will be monitored during the project progress, and in particular during 
each of the 3 iteration cycles of 5G -SOLUTIONS Phase 3, by applying Azdic’s impact mapping technique 64, thus 
constituting the main driver for 5G-SOLUTIONS’s ongoing impact assessment imperatives. In this respect, impact 
analysis and monitoring will be applied  to the LLs to collect, analyse data and present the results against the 
reference target KPIs. These will be re -examined and fine -tuned in task T1.1. For the development of 5G-
SOLUTIONS components to TRL 6, verification and validation in the LLs will be conducted to achieve carrier-grade 
levels. KPI measurements will be recorded and will be compared to reference KPIs indicated in the LL descriptions 
in Section 1.3.4.1. It should be noted that the estimate of potential improvements in 5G networks against the current 
4G technology is substantial, evidencing the real need for the proposed work and associated innovation.  
 
2.1.3 Other impacts 
Together with the impacts identified in Tables 2.1a and 2.1b, 5G-SOLUTIONS will eventually produce a positive 
impact on different actors and areas that will benefit from the results of the project, as described in the following 
sub sections. The consortium believes that 5G will become the underlying fabric of an entire ecosyst em of fully 
connected intelligent sensors and devices, capable of delivering benefits at every rung of the ecosystem’s ladder, 
providing seamless, continuous connectivity for business applications, but also transforming the daily lives of 
European citizens.  
 
2.1.3.1 Impact on SMEs 
SMEs have a great added value in providing innovative concepts and solutions that could be used in various places 
of the 5G value chain. SMEs are important stakeholders in the overall development chain towards future 
communication networks65. In particular, the development of innovative applications – that is an essential part of the 
Living Lab approach - requires SME involvement. High-tech SMEs will be early adopters of 5G technology and will 
build the future market of 5G services. These arguments led us to include the activities planned in  WP9 task T9.2 
(see Section 3.1.4) that will enable us to identify the right stakeholders.  In particular, a public competition will be 
organised in M24, requesting SMEs and spin-off of research institutes, who are willing to contribute to the project’s 
experiments, to submit their ideas on how to best exploit 5G-SOLUTIONS’s results for developing new applications. 
The SMEs with the best ideas will be selected and 3 prizes (€10.000 each) will be given to them (relevant budget has 
been assigned to A2T for this purpose). Such SMEs will be external non-consortium members.  
 
 Measure of achievement: The SME involvement will be assessed through direct evaluation of targets proposed 
and actual achievements as benchmarked in the project ’s activity reports. It can also be assessed through the 
dissemination and communication plan (Deliverable D9.2), showing exactly which SMEs were contacted. Table 2.2 
outlines relevant target KPIs, which are based on previous experiences from A2T’s and TIM’s engagement in H2020 
projects, FP7 accelerators and ENEL’s Open Innovation Program, focusing on contacting, onboarding and engaging 
SMEs, including start -ups and (public/private) research spin -offs, selecting innovat ive ideas. Considering the 
complexity of engagement and selection, a multi-stage involvement processes to reach adequate quality standard of 
participating parties with the following KPIs have been set to measure SME contact, relationship and participation 
effectiveness. 
 
Table 2.2: SME related KPIs of 5G-SOLUTIONS 
Outcome Metrics Targets 
Involvement of 
SMEs 
SMEs/start-ups receiving information on usage opportunities  >500 
SMEs using the 5G-SOLUTIONS KPI visualisation system 20 
Peer networking events organised 3 
                                                 
64 Adzic, G., (2012), Impact Mapping: Making a big impact with software products and projects. Provoking Thoughts.   
65 https://bscw.5g-ppp.eu/pub/bscw.cgi/d119698/SME-A5-brochure-final-web.pdf  
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  50  
Prizes assigned to SMEs for the best experiments (see task T9.2) 3 
Size of investors network 10 
VC Investments  10 companies 
Number of active users 100 
 
2.1.3.2 Impact on the telecommunications industry 
As indicated in a study carried out by Ericsson and Arthur D. 
Little66 (Figure 2.3), with 5G technology, telecom operators are 
looking at an additional 36% revenue from 5G -enabled 
industry digitalisation market opportunities (in 10 industries) 
by 2026, compared to the 10-15% annual growth a decade ago 
and the current 1.5% annual growth for current operator service 
revenues. This represents an anticipated $619 billion (€504 
billion) revenue opportunity for telecom operators addressing 
industry digitali sation with 5G technology, broken down as 
follows: $204 bil lion (€166 billion) for network development 
(connectivity and infrastructure provisioning), and $337 billion 
(€275 billion) from service enablement services and $79 billion 
(€69 billion) from application and service provisioning. 
 
Given the above opportunities, 5G-SOLUTIONS will help the 
telecom industry by providing research and evidence through the outcomes from the Living Labs, which will 
support telecom operators, telecom vendors as well as the consortium’s partners who have products and 
services in the network management, SDN, NFV and vertical applications market. Table 2.3 presents the impact 
that 5G-SOLUTIONS aims at bringing to key specific actors of the telecom industry. 
 
Table 2.3: 5G-SOLUTIONS’s impact on telecommunications (telecom) actors 
Type of 
actor 
Project 
representatives Potential impact of 5G-SOLUTIONS results on their business activity 
Telecom 
operators 
 
Service & 
content 
providers 
TIM 
FNET 
TNOR 
From the field trials carried out within the 5G-SOLUTIONS project, such telecom 
operators will gain the necessary confidence, to: 
• Proceed with 5G infrastructure and new spectrum licensing investments, and 
then, proceed with wide-scale commercial deployments upgrading  their radio 
access and core networks with 5G functionality. 
• Proceed with economic benefit/cost analysis and design the operational and 
business requirements to bring 5G-enabled services to the market. 
• Prioritise the benefits of 5G that can be brought to market by 2020 and beyond. 
Telecom 
solutions 
providers,  
Telecom 
equipment 
vendors 
NOKIA 
IBM 
LMI   
5G-SOLUTIONS will enable telecom solution providers and vendors to better 
understand how their solutions address the evolving needs of network operators, as 
the industry evolves to 5G. The LLs of 5G-SOLUTIONS will provide them with a 
detailed view of the specifications of 5G networks, from which they will be able to 
upgrade their 5G equipment, as well as develop specifications for telecom solutions 
and compatible 5G services at competitive prices. 
SMEs APPART 
EBOS 
5G-SOLUTIONS will enable SMEs to leverage the project’s application APIs for 
facilitating the development, portability and provisioning of new user -friendly 5G 
vertical applications and solutions. These APIs will support the digital 
transformation underway in enterprises and industry verticals, enabling them to  
prosper in multi-dimensioned business ecosystems.  
 
2.1.3.3 Impact on the European economy 
Apart from the ICT sector, 5G has the potential to create new jobs and stimulate growth in all industries that are able 
to exploit wireless mobile technology to become more competitive, to create new business models and to offer new 
services67. At European level, according to the study “Identification and quantification of key socio-economic data 
to support strategic planning for the introduction of 5G in Europe ”68, aiming at forecasting the qualitative and 
                                                 
66 https://www.ericsson.com/assets/local/narratives/networks/documents/report-bnew-17001714-uen-rev-a.pdf  
67 http://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/BRIE/2016/573892/EPRS_BRI(2016)573892_EN.pdf  
68 https://connectcentre.ie/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/EC-Study_5G-in-Europe.pdf  
The study was prepared for the European Commission DG Communications Networks, Content & Technology by Tech4i2, Real Wireless 
 
Figure 2.3: Market opportunities for telecom 
actors by 2026 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  51  
quantitative socio-economic benefits of 5G, in particular in vertical industries, 5G is expected to generate economic 
benefits of €62.5 billion/year by 2025. 63% of these benefits wi ll arise for business and 37% will be provided for 
consumers and society. Input-output analysis69 suggests that 5G investment in the EU will lead to multiplier effects 
with a value €141 billion. These effects are likely to create 2.3 million jobs in EU.  
 
The vertical domains, covered in 5G-SOLUTIONS, address industry segments that directly address 46% of 
the European GDP (as analysed in Section 2.1) and which will benefit from the pan -European 5G network 
deployments.  As such, verifying the 5G KPIs in the content of those industry segments is expected to have a 
substantial business and economic impact for the partners, and to the EU as a whole when disseminated through 5G-
PPP. 5G-SOLUTIONS’s indirect impact on the European economy will be to contribute to accelerate 5G 
deployment in Europe, by demonstrating that 5G KPIs are feasible and attainable, starting from 5 key 
industrial segments, where 5G business practical applications carry tremendous potential. 
 
2.1.3.4 Scientific impact: Improving European innovation capacity and integration of new knowledge 
The challenge-based third pillar of H2020 emphasises the need to take the societal problems themselves as a starting 
point for research and innovation work. The technical work of the project requires an interdisciplinary approach of 
the project ( high-impact vertical use cases, fusing telecom big-data graphical analytics with cognitive machine 
learning techniques with cloud -computing approaches for near real -time presentation of 5G network multi-
perspective KPIs, data privacy, etc.) that can only be provided by a combination of researchers, technology suppliers 
and industrial end-users. 
 
In order to interpret and illustrate the process of knowledge creation, s everal concepts have emerged, in  particular 
related to  the non -linear nature of innovation and the multiple input and feedback loops required between the  
stakeholders in an innovation system. For example, 5G -SOLUTIONS will allow us to construct, study and analyse 
data on graphs, which represent the performance capabilities of pre-commercial 5G networks illustrating in the field 
the interactions between vertical industry companies and end-user customers. Such developments would not only be 
useful to 5G-SOLUTIONS project but also to the broader 5G research communities which would benefit from the 
results of the project. 
 
In addition, Europe presents a linguistically inhomogeneous environment , which is also reflected in the way  the 
telecommunication industry is evolving. This multilingual and multi-cultural aspect will allow 5G-SOLUTIONS to 
provide real data from real end-users in the field , which reflect this diversity and provide better adaptability to 5G 
markets outside of Europe. This will provide 5G-SOLUTIONS with a significant competitive advantage when 
compared with US-centric 5G technologies and services. The innovations identified in the project will complement 
its shared commercialisation strategy and will be evidenced by formal EUPO and USPTO patent filings. 
 
2.1.3.5 Societal, environmental and other impacts 
5G-SOLUTIONS has considerable potential to create positive societal and environmental impacts, ultimately through 
the deployment of 5G technologies in a wide number of sectors. Such impacts will fundamentally reshape not only 
the way European citizens work, communicate, travel, keep healthy or entertain themselves, but also the societal 
design of the entire European countries, in such a way that the structural and infrastructural differences between the 
single EU states could b e reframed by the key driver of a more efficient, well-being oriented, socially accepted, 
and environmentally-friendly European way of life. According to the study “Identification and quantification of 
key socio-economic data to support strategic planning for the introduction of 5G in Europe ”70, a wide array of 
benefits, of societal, environmental and other types, are foreseen. During 5G-SOLUTIONS, impacts of societal, 
environmental nature and for citizens will become apparent during the field trials. An overview of the most important 
impacts, classified under the Living Labs and specific use cases (UCs), are as follows: 
 
Factories of the Future (LL1) 
Productivity gains in the manufacturing sector  will be reali sed thanks to process optimi sation inside digital 
factories (UC 1.1 & 1.2), remote controlling of factory equipment  (UC1.3), connected goods (UC1.4) and rapid 
deployment of new robotic machinery (UC1.5) . It is estimated that 5G data exchange capabilities will enhance 
productivity by at least 1%/year creating productivity gains of €14.5bn/year in the EU manufacturing sector64. 
 
Smart Energy (LL2) 
The 5G-SOLUTIONS Smart Energy LL will align the project ’s objectives with the needs of the European market. 
The E U energy market is very heterogeneous in terms of both maturity and structure; this leads to investment 
                                                 
CONNECT, Trinity College Dublin, InterDigital 
69 Input-output analysis is a quantitative economic technique that examines the interdependencies between different parts of an econom y to 
examine ‘trickle-down’ impacts. 
70 https://connectcentre.ie/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/EC-Study_5G-in-Europe.pdf . The study was prepared for the European Commission 
DG Communications Networks, Content & Technology by Tech4i2, Real Wireless CONNECT, Trinity College Dublin, InterDigital 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  52  
cancelling, negatively affecting competitiveness in Europe. 5G-SOLUTIONS addresses this shortcoming by working 
towards an open and secure Smart Grid by:  
• Reducing both CAPEX and OPEX of energy utilities  by enabling real-time monitoring and control of the 
Smart Grid, powered by 5G technology, without the need for a dedicated/private telecom network and without 
compromising the security and reliability of the network.  
• Exploiting the revenues from the most promising segment of the energy market, such as the Smart Charging 
services for Electric Vehicle fleets, expected to be boosted by a rate of 25% in the next decade according to a 
market analysis by Deloitte71. 
 
Smart Cities & Ports (LL3) 
5G will transform wireless communications supporting the proliferation of IoT devices and the inexorable growth in 
mobile data arising from the widespread use of innovative services in Smart Cities. In particular, the need for 5G is 
more than just increased speed or bandwidth; it is about achiev ing the execution of millions of machine -type 
transactions, maintaining ultra -low latency, efficiently using the radio spectrum across diverse operating 
environments, providing wider and deeper coverage and constant data collaboration demanded by the IoT . 5G-
SOLUTIONS will improve the Smart Cities and Smart Ports industry, by: 
▪ Reducing environmental pollution through the use of intelligent street lighting (UC3.1) that will monitor the 
traffic flow and automatically switch on and off based on vehicle and pedestrian traffic, advising also the drivers 
of the availability of parking slots (UC3.2). 
▪ Providing a wider approach to smart city co-creation and exploring in collaboration with another H2020 Smart 
City Lighthouse project (+CityxChange) (UC3.3). 
▪ Reducing both CAPEX and OPEX of energy consumption in smart buildings  (UC3.4) by connecting and 
remotely controlling devices, such as air conditioners, refrigerators, lighting and heaters via app ropriate 
smartphone applications. 
▪ Reducing OPEX and time and improve effectiveness of ports and harbours by maximising the availability 
of space and resources and optimising logistics operations (UC3.5).  
▪ Improving safety and reducing crime within port areas through the deployment of automated sound location 
detection systems (UC3.6) transmitting real -time information to the port authorities enabling them to act 
immediately.  
 
Media & Entertainment (M&E) (LL4) 
5G will considerably transform user habits and expectations when it comes to media consumption and production. 
The overall user experience will broaden and deepen rapidly, in terms of types of services (on-demand content, user 
and semi-professional generated content, games etc.), conditions of consumption (on the move, at home, etc.) as well 
as user devices (TV sets, smartphones, wearables, watches, and VR/AR devices). 5G shall enable at least six main 
use cases of M&E services 72 (UC4.1 to UC 4.6) with expected shifting impacts, yet unquantified in economic 
terms, on the way citizens learn, study and entertain themselves.  
 
2.1.4 Barriers and obstacles on the road to achieve the Expected Impacts and how to overcome them 
The advantages and unique value propositions of a European-wide action like 5G-SOLUTIONS have been largely 
described in Section 1.4. However, the consortium is well aware of a number of potential barriers and obstacles , as 
listed below, which – if not properly managed – could limit the expected potential impact of the action.  
 
Barriers / obstacles Steps to achieve the impacts and overcome the barriers / obstacles 
Fragmentation: The approach to 
5G development in many countries 
around the world benefits of 
government sponsored “5G” 
investments73. 5G -PPP could risk 
not to be properly coupled with 
national infrastructure investments 
to implement live 5G networks 
embracing vertical industry 
stakeholders. 
5G-SOLUTIONS originates from various private and public in vestments, 
linked to larger scope strategies of the involved industries  development. 
Also, five 5G-SOLUTIONS consortium partners (i.e. TIM, TNOR, LMI, 
NOKIA, CTTC) are key members and decision make rs of the 5G -IA and 
four consortium partners (i.e. TIM, LMI, NOKIA, WIT) are leading six 5G-
PPP Working Groups (Pre -standardisation, Spectrum, 5G architecture, 
Software networks, Network Management and QoS, Trials). Therefore, 5G-
SOLUTIONS has the potential to overcome the risk for fragmentation and 
turn synergies through the project in a real value at EU level. The industry 
partners will provide a bridge from 5G -PPP and also leverage upon their 
involvement in national infrastructure pilots and investments. 
                                                 
71 https://www2.deloitte.com/insights/us/en/focus/future-of-mobility/power-utilities-future-of-electric-vehicles.html  
72 https://5g-ppp.eu/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/BROCHURE_5PPP_BAT2_PL.pdf  
73 e.g. South Korea investing $34bn (~€29bn) on SK Teleco m, KT and LG Uplus; Japan investing $45.5b (~€39bn) on DoCoMo, KDDI and 
Softbank; China investing $180b (~€155bn) by 2023 on MIIT and IMT-2020 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  53  
Lack of Common Standards : 
Given the substantial infrastructure 
investments behind the ICT-17 
facilities, which 5G -SOLUTIONS 
will use for conducting field trials , 
the existence of consolidated 
standards represents a solid 
foundation for long -term 5G 
services that the market will accept. 
5G-SOLUTIONS has set a plan of concrete actions to generate impact on 
standardisation (see Expected Impact 4 Section 2.1.1 , and Section 2.2.2 ) 
and the consortium builds on many leaders of standardisation in 3GPP, 
ETSI, IETF, ITU, etc. We will adopt the latest consolidated releases of 5G 
related standards from 3GPP and ETSI NFV and will submit parts of our 
innovative solutions to SDOs. We will also use the 5G -SOLUTIONS to 
validate standard releases and collaborate with SDOs. By adopting this 
active role in the standardisation process, we aim to turn a potential obstacle 
into an opportunity. 
Regulation: The regulatory aspects, 
above all on spectrum allocation, 
access to network resources by 
verticals and measure data traffic, 
may cause problems in the ac tual 
deployment of live 5G networks. 
Aspects, such as  electromagnetic 
environmental pollution or 
concentration of 5G technologies on 
a reduced number of stakeholders, 
thus resulting in network -neutrality 
concerns, may run into regulatory 
obstacles for wide adoption of 5G. 
5G-SOLUTIONS is aware of these issues and has planned specific 
activities to take them into account from the very beginning. A specific 
project task (T8.1) will study the market impact of 5G-SOLUTIONS. Even 
though the involvement of 5G -SOLUTIONS in regulation is out of the 
project’s scope, it is important to note that several of the operators are 
actively involved with policy makers and all levels of licensing bodies and 
will constantly monitor and inform consortium members of evolution in this 
domain. In addition, the Secretary General of the Independent Regulators 
Group (IRG) in Europe, Ms. Delphine Bernet -Travert will participate in 
5G-SOLUTIONS’s External Advisory Board, so as to provide valuable 
advice to the consortium on regulatory ma tters related to the impact 
dimensions that National Regulatory Authorities may have upon, such as 
spectrum policies and 5G-supporting implementation rules. 
Security and privacy: From the 
point for view of the vertical 
industries we can end up collecting 
end-user position and contextual 
data, thus raising potential concerns 
on security and privacy. 
5G-SOLUTIONS will introduce mechanisms for the anonymisation and/or 
encryption of any personal data to be logged in its KPI visualisation system. 
A specific partner (CEL) participates in our consortium with expertise on 
these aspects, who will monitor them (further elaborated in Section 2.2.5.1) 
also introducing privacy by design approaches and ethical considerations in 
5G-SOLUTIONS. 
End-users adoption of 5G 
services: Despite the numerous 
positive forecast analyses on 5G 
deployment and market 
expectations, it could be possible 
that the roll -out of the 5G services 
will be slowed by ec onomic factors 
directly impacting the end-users. 
Obviously, this will represent a significant barrier to the realisation of the 
expected 5G-SOLUTIONS project impacts for the involved industry, but 
the societal implications of this are well beyond the proje ct’s control. The 
5G-SOLUTIONS innovative use cases strongly contribute to demonstrate 
real vertical sector requirements. This demonstration is an important step in 
the cost-benefit relationship, carried out in the business, marketing plan and 
sustainability in task T8. 2. 5G-SOLUTIONS will provide telecom and 
service operators, as well as SMEs with real world evidence of real 
markets where to better position their 5G service offerings.
2.2 Measures to maximise impact 
2.2.1 Dissemination and Communication  
The impact of the project is supported by the implementation of a comprehensive dissemination and communication 
plan that will describe the strategy, released at M3, revised in M20 and maintained throughout the end of the project 
until M36 (Deliverable D9.2). This section outlines how the project will establish and organise the dissemination and 
communication actions to promote the project and the adoption of its outcomes beyond its lifetime. The plan will 
also describe how 5G-SOLUTIONS will liaise with other projects of the 5G-PPP programme in order to contribute 
to and benefit from the related activities at the 5G-PPP programme level. 
 
 
2.2.1.1 Joint Dissemination Strategy  
Target audiences and Objectives 
The general objectives of the joint 5G-SOLUTIONS dissemination strategy are to disclose project results that can be 
used by the target audience to progress their own work, i.e. to build upon the knowledge generated by 5G -
SOLUTIONS, fertilising the advancement of technology, science, industry and policy. 5G -SOLUTIONS has 
identified a number of target audiences, which are listed in Table 2.4a. The specific joint dissemination activities will 
be tailored to the needs and profile of the target audience for dissemination. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  54  
Table 2.4a: Target audience groups for dissemination 
Target audience Description Dissemination Objectives 
Academia Institutions primarily for education and early 
research  
Consideration of results in updated 
curricula, advanced courses and new R&D 
initiatives 
Public R&D 
Institutions with innovation-oriented R&D and 
technology transfer (e.g. EU Investment Bank, 
Start-Up Europe, EC Digital Innovation Hubs) 
Adoption of results in technology transfer 
and new R&D initiatives with industry 
Industry R&D / 
R&I 
Private companies that maintain R&D groups for 
new products and services, e.g. telecom vendors, 
such as Ericsson, Nokia and vertical stakeholders  
Adoption of results in product and service 
roadmaps and planning of new products, 
services and future R&D initiatives 
Government 
Governmental agencies mainly concerned with 
policy setting (e.g. Chamber of Commerce, 
Regional Development Units) 
Consideration of results in policy 
development 
IT experts from 
SMEs 
Developers of new services and applications, 
typically for vertical industry requirements 
Adoption of results for development and 
deployment of new 5G-enabled applications  
Public/Private 
associations 
Initiatives that leverage public and private 
resources and funds for joint undertakings (e.g. 
EIT Digital, European Private Equity and Venture 
Capital Association (EVCA)) 
Consideration of results in the planning of 
joint undertakings  
 
Dissemination Channels 
A major element for dissemination relates to the joint and coordinated participation in any relevant activities of the 
5G-PPP and the 5G Infrastructure Association (5G-IA). 5G-SOLUTIONS will contribute to the brochures and other 
material coordinated at 5G-PPP level, such as the “European 5G Annual Journal” (cf. 2018 edition at https://bscw.5g-
ppp.eu/pub/bscw.cgi/d257916/Euro%205G%20Annual%20Journal%202018-v1.1.pdf), the 5G -PPP projects 
brochure (current edition available at https://5g-ppp.eu/flayer-brochure/) and other material including videos (cf. 
project videos at https://5g-ppp.eu/5g-ppp-phase-3-videos-now-available/), as requested by the 5G -IA and/or the 
coordinating support action of the 5G-PPP.  
 
Furthermore, 5G-SOLUTIONS has identified channels for the dissemination of the project’s results to scientific, 
technology and industry communities. The specific activities will be tailored to the needs, clients and events that will 
be used for dissemination. More specifically, the target audience and the dissemination channels will be actively 
monitored and selected to achieve the highest possible impact in geographic areas relative to the partners ’ own 
planned activities. Table 2.4b provides an outline of the target audience and channels. 
 
Table 2.4b: Dissemination channels 
Target audience  Channels 
Universities, Public R&D, 
Industry R&D through 
Scientific journals 
• IEEE Proceedings, Internet Computing, Pervasive Computing, Vehicular 
Technology Magazine, Wireless Transactions, Access, Transactions on Network 
and Service Management, Transactions on Communications, and Journal on 
Selected Areas in Communications;  
• IEEE Network and Communications Magazines, IEEE/ACM Transactions on 
Networking, ACM Computer Communication Review 
• Wireless Networks – Springer, Elsevier Computer Networks and Journal of 
Network and Computer Applications 
Universities, Public R&D, 
Industry R&D through 
R&D Conferences 
• ICC - International Conference on Communications 
• ACM SIGCOMM MobiHoc 
• IEEE GLOBECOM, DySPAN, NetSoft 
• IEEE 5G Summit 2020-2022 
• SPAWC – Signal Processing Advances in Wireless Communications 
• Technology, Knowledge and Society 
• International Conference on Wireless Networks and Mobile Communications 
Government, Industry 
R&D, IT experts through 
Industrial Exhibitions 
and Business 
Conferences 
• EuCNC 2020-2022, Global-5G Europe 2020-2022, MWC 2020-2022  
• CTTC, acting as the project’s Dissemination & Communication Manager, will 
arrange a dedicated event for the project results, inviting chief R&D and CIO s. In 
addition, CTTC expects to arrange a 5G specific workshop with major telecom 
vendors and telecom associations in Europe to distribute the project’s results. 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  55  
 
2.2.1.2 Joint Communication Strategy  
Target audiences and Objectives 
Table 2.5 provides an outline of the target audience of the joint 5G-SOLUTIONS communication strategy and sets 
out the communications objectives to maximise the 5G-SOLUTIONS project's exposure. 
 
Table 2.5: Target audience groups for communication 
Target Group Description Interest in the project 
A - Industry, 
SMEs and 
Entrepreneurs 
Stakeholders from industry, network 
operators, SMEs and entrepreneurs, 
operating in the 5G infrastructure 
domain (e.g. EU Telecom Network 
Operators, 5G Automotive Association, 
ICT WG of Enterprise EU, 5G ACIA) 
• Utilisation of project's results in operations and in 
their R&D activities for new service and product 
development. 
• Amplify innovation in 5G infrastructure by blending 
5G-SOLUTIONS results with in-house artefacts 
B - 5G PPP 
infrastructure 
programme 
Stakeholders 
Participants, project partners and 
relevant stakeholders active in the 5G 
PPP infrastructure (e.g. 5G Trials WG, 
WG on Verticals of 5G-IA managed by 
TIM) 
• Identification of common topics 
• Synergies and collaborations for results promotion 
• Enhancing innovation through results combination 
• Co-organisation of events 
C - Technology 
Clusters 
European initiatives and clusters, 
research communities, associations, 
(e.g. ETNO NetWorld2020, Digital 
Business Innovation, Digital Agenda, 
Innovation Union, 5G-ACIA, etc.) 
• Inclusion of project's results to collaborative research 
activities (roadmap, white papers…) 
• Dissemination of project's results to their members 
and stakeholders 
• Participation in project's events for knowledge 
exchange 
D - Researchers 
and Academics 
Researchers and academics working in 
universities, research centres, R&D 
departments of industry 
• Advancing research post-project 
• Training personnel & students 
• Porting results to real-life industry cases through the 
re-use of results 
E - Policy 
Makers 
Policy-makers at any level (e.g. Europe 
of Regions, EC Directorate for 
Communication, European Radio 
Spectrum Policy Group) 
• Evaluation of the project's techno-economic and 
regulatory aspects  
• Definition of future research and innovation 
directions based on project's acquired knowledge 
F - Standards 
bodies and fora 
Standards bodies and industry fora (e.g. 
3GPP, ETSI, IETF, NGMN, IEEE) 
• Development of roadmaps for standards development 
• Pre-standardisation workshop 
• Input for standardisation activities 
G - General 
Public 
General public and anyone interested in 
the project 
• Understand the value of European research  
• Stimulate innovation in unexpected groups of society  
 
Based on the target audience groups identified above and their expected interest in the project, the objectives of the 
joint communication strategy and their relation to the target audience groups are identified in Table 2.6. 
 
Table 2.6: Communication objectives 
Objectives Description Target Groups 
A B C D E F G 
Provide a clear view of the project goals and its results, including the 5G-PPP perspective ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ 
Create an active community of interested stakeholders and potential users and collect 
knowledge and requirements considered by the project's activities ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫  
Prepare the ground for the exploitation of project's results towards the industry ⚫ ⚫    ⚫  
Create awareness of the project among the full range of stakeholders impacted by the results ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫  ⚫  
Establish liaisons with other projects and initiatives for knowledge and innovation transfer  ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫  
Support the dissemination and exploitation of results (including the 5G PPP programme 
results) by formulating adapted key messages, and prepare adapted communication material ⚫  ⚫ ⚫  ⚫  
Government, Public 
R&D, Public/Private 
associations, Industry 
R&D, Universities 
through Online Media 
• www.telecoms.com, www.networkworld.com, www.techworld.com, 
www.infoworld.com, www.itworld.com, www.techworld.com 
• Webinars/showcasing events (at least 6) 
• Online repository for sharing project’s results 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  56  
Recognition of the results (including the 5G-PPP programme results) among the research 
communities, standardisation bodies, potential users, policy-maker institutions.  ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫  
 
Communication Channels 
The integrated approach to communication adopted by 5G -SOLUTIONS, combines a mix of traditional and 
disruptive communication channels as listed below: 
• Interaction with peer projects , in particular within the scope of the 5G -PPP, including participation and 
contribution to EC concentration and cluster meetings. 
• Publications of high -quality results in international media , such as  peer-reviewed magazines and journals 
including special issues in journals. 
• Contributions and participation to international conferences, workshops and summits. 
• Events: The project will engage in the organisation of established conferences and workshops. In this context 
project consortium members, having the necessary experience and track record, will organise special  sessions, 
panels, and workshops in top conferences as appropriate. In consent and in cooperation with other projects of 
the 5G-PPP, the project will contribute to the organisation of a targeted initiative for all stakeholders of the 
5G infrastructure business, scientific and research community.  
• Workshops: The project will organise 4 industrial workshops (2 hosted by TIM, 1 by CTTC and 1 by TNOR) 
and 1 pre -standardisation workshop (hosted by IRT) organised jointly with other 5G -PPP projects, to draw a 
complete picture of the achievements in Europe.  
• Showcasing: The 5G-SOLUTIONS consortium has plans to use and showcase its results in at least 2 public 
events (e.g. Patra carnivals in 2021 & 2022) . This is expected to generate the largest industrial and societal 
impact on the various involved stakeholders, hence paving the way to a faster adoption of 5G technologies. 
• Participation in large industrial international exhibitions: The 5G-SOLUTIONS showcases will serve as the 
instrument to document and quantify the benefits of the 5G -SOLUTIONS results and to communicate these to 
industry stakeholders in relevant industrial exhibitions. Specifically, 5G-SOLUTIONS will participate with an 
exhibition booth in 2 major international events, such as the MWC 2021 and MWC 2022, as well as in one large 
professional media exhibition, such as the NAB (USA), IBC (USA), BroadcastAsia or CABSAT (Dubai). 
• White papers in conjunction with the European Technology Platform Networld2020 and industry fora. 
• Interactions with worldwide forums, institutes, and standardisation organisations (see Table 2.9).  
• Online presence : A modern, dynamic and user-friendly 5G-SOLUTIONS website will be  designed and 
maintained by EBOS acting as a web portal for public dissemination of project information and results. The web 
portal will be regularly updated and will employ state -of-the-art social media mechanisms  (e.g. Blogs, 
LinkedIn, Facebook, Twitter) to announce new information concerning the project, its results, upcoming events, 
etc. and to engage the target audience groups. 
• Promotional material: Layout and printing of flyers, posters, other materials as needed including but not limited 
to A 3/A4-format brochure s, A4 -format information folde r, A0/A1 -format poster, A5 -format double sided 
distribution leaflet and a 5G-SOLUTIONS project PowerPoint presentation template.  
• Project documentation: Deliverables, technical reports, posters, and presentations will be made publicly 
available in the project’s website and through social media channels.  
• Logo and Templates: A common template and logo support ing the identity creation / branding of the project 
will be produced and used in all project presentations and publications. 
• Newsletters: Two electronic newsletters per year will be released presenting the main achievements.  
• Training activities: Training in 5G-SOLUTIONS will be designed and delivered through a dedicated task (task 
T9.4 led by CTTC) to support 5G network stakeholders across Europe, maximising the use and impact of the 
project’s outputs. It will be used to provide the opportunity for hands -on experience on how to use its KPI 
visualisation system to conduct innovative use case validation, as well as its APIs for enabling easy interfacing 
of new services to the 5G interworking layer.  Training will be offered through workshops, webinars, online 
documentation and community mailing lists. Training supports and facilitates academic and inte rnational 
collaboration and helps the adoption of 5G-SOLUTIONS results in particular in open source communities (e.g. 
OpenAirInterface). Training will aim at keeping participants’ knowledge and capabilities sharp during and after 
the project. Therefore, training activities include:  
• Agreeing on a concrete methodology for the design of the training programmes.  
• Developing “dynamic” online courses in a modular format so that they can be continuously updated.  
• Developing an official enrolment process, controlled by a secure authorisation system.  
• Developing a competencies matrix and credit system for all courses, linked to on-line assessment activities, 
to allow certification (and periodical re-certification) of participants.  
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  57  
• Setting up online workshops  and hands-on training labs  (as an integral part of the curricula), to allow 
experimentation and piloting with the 5G-SOLUTIONS KPI visualisation system, APIs and services on its 
use cases, amplifying the opportunities to learn, develop, and apply the new skills.  
• Creating a trusted community of knowledge exchange to encourage the interactive sharing of knowledge and 
best practices between participants. 
 
All communication, dissemination and capacity building activities are included in WP9. 
 
2.2.1.3 Dissemination and Communication (D&C) Phases 
Dissemination and communication activities will be carried out in four phases. Each of these phases have their own 
objectives and target audience groups and will perform the activities using the best-suited channels. These D&C 
phases will be discussed and aligned with other projects of the 5G -PPP programme in order to achieve an optimum 
mix of dissemination and co mmunication for 5G -SOLUTIONS and the 5G -PPP programme at large.  Table 2.7 
presents the four 5G-SOLUTIONS dissemination phases in detail. 
 
Table 2.7: 5G-SOLUTIONS Dissemination and Communication (D&C) Phases 
 
2.2.1.4 Outcomes, Metrics, and Targets for Dissemination and Communication 
Table 2.8 lists the  metrics and their corresponding target values, which will be used to measure the outcome and 
effectiveness of the dissemination and communication activities. Deliverable D9.2 will report on the degree of 
meeting these target values. 
 
Type of information Target audience Channels  Goals 
D&C Phase 1 (Create awareness) M1-M12 
Objective: To create awareness about the project’s objectives and expected results for as many 5G Stakeholders 
as possible, leveraging the awareness that has already been created around the 5G-PPP programme. 
• Presentation of 5G-
SOLUTIONS  
• Objectives and 
expected results of 
5G-SOLUTIONS 
• Industry, technological, 
research and academia  
• Potential end-users  
• International Stakeholders 
identified 
• Conferences, workshops 
• Brochures, roll-ups, posters  
• Website  
• Social media channels  
• General visibility  
• Attract potential customers, 
investors and collaborators   
D&C Phase 2 (Accelerate potential impact) M13-M26 
Objective:  To kick-start and boost the potential impact of the project through the elaboration of the use cases, 
leveraging the achieved awareness of D&C Phase 1 to reach out to target stakeholder groups.  
• Presenting 
elaborated use 
cases of 5G-
SOLUTIONS  
• Demonstration of 
usage and results   
• Potential end-users  
• Specific technological, 
research and academic 
communities  
• 5G vendors and 
application developers 
• Conferences, workshops 
• Publications in journals  
• Special sessions in major 
congresses/exhibitions 
• Website  
• Social media channels  
• Exposing synergies with 
other 5G-PPP projects 
• Providing visibility 
• Informing EC authorities 
• Attracting potential 
collaborators  
D&C Phase 3 (Results) M27-M33 
Objective:  To leverage general awareness, to emphasise the use of the 5G-SOLUTIONS offerings and results, and 
to attract users and customers of the project’s partners, thus increasing the impact through external collaboration. 
• Presenting 
elaborated use 
cases of 5G-
SOLUTIONS  
• Demonstration of 
usage and results   
• Potential end-users  
• Potential developers in 
ICT companies 
• Specific technological, 
research and academic 
communities 
• Conferences, workshops  
• Publications in journals 
• Special sessions in major 
congresses/exhibitions 
• Website  
• Social media channels  
• Attracting potential investors  
• Attracting potential 
customers 
D&C Phase 4 (Valorisation) M34-M36 and >M36 
Objective:  To demonstrate the usefulness of the results to internal and external users and customers and to attract 
investors. To consolidate and publish the final scientific and business findings of the project in national/ 
international journals and online media. 
• Final results of 5G-
SOLUTIONS 
• User oriented 
demonstration 
• Potential end-users  
• Potential developers in 
ICT companies 
• Specific technological, 
research and academic 
communities. 
• Website  
• Publications in journals  
• Industry focused events 
• Client demonstrations and 
demos in major 5G events 
• Attracting potential 
customers 
• Attracting investors  
• Informing the EC Authorities 
• Demonstrating results to 
existing customers 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  58  
Table 2.8: Dissemination and communication outcome, metrics and targets 
Outcome Metrics Targets 
Degree of 
Adoption 
Supporting events  3 
Number of people participating in consultations 100 
Wide 
stakeholder 
engagement 
Number of industrial workshops  4 
Number of webinars/showcasing events 6 
Number of webinar and workshop participants 300 
Number of attendees in information campaign, webinars, peer networking events > 1.000 
Size of the community (incl. Twitter followers, mailing list subscribers, bloggers) > 1.000 
Media coverage (editorials and clippings) 100 
Blog posts, tweets including editorials and clippings > 3.000 
Unique Web Visits > 5.000 
Scientific articles and press releases > 15 
Technical/scientific articles & policy briefs > 10 
White papers, newsletters, success stories, factsheets > 15 
Conference presentations  > 20 
Number of online training modules 3 
International 
standards 
groups  
Number of pre-standardisation workshops 1 
Number of companies involved  > 50 
Number of white papers downloads   > 1.000 
 
2.2.2 Joint standardisation contribution and open source communities 
The 5G-SOLUTIONS consortium is formed of key vertical market players including operators and vendors from the 
telecommunications industry, as well as expert partner representatives who participate in the project with the common 
goal of validating the maturity of 5G services as a baseline for a concrete go-to-market strategy.  
 
In this respect, standards adopti on is key. In fact, the 5G radio/core technologies and the ir corresponding control 
solutions for slicing, resource virtuali sation and abstraction, cognitive and cross-domain multi -tenant service 
orchestration and network management are amongst the hot topics of many 5G standards developing communities.  
3GPP is working on the completion of release R16 (2019) for 5G New Radio to cover the 5G Non-Stand-Alone and 
Stand-Alone operation models with advanced plans for work items and then R17 (from 2020 onwards). 3GPP is 
specifying a 5G reference network architecture , including features like network slicing, efficient user plane and 
efficient content delivery [3GPP TS 23.50174, 3GPP TS 23.50275]. In the area of management of virtualised networks, 
ETSI NFV ISG is progressing towards the NFV Rel. 3 completing the detailed specification of the various interfaces 
identified for the orchestration [ETSI -MANO76] and the virtual infrastructure layer to m ake NFV ready for 
deployment and operation. 3GPP is also working in the management of network slices [3GPP TS 28.530 77, 3GPP 
TS 28.53178], and ITU-T has recently established a high -priority work item on network slicing orchestration and 
management [ITU-T Y.NSOM79] aiming at delivering a first release of the reference architecture by the end of 2018. 
The ETSI MEC ISG is progressing towards its 2nd phase and specifically works to advance the MEC architecture 
towards a Multi -Access Edge (mobile, but also Wi -Fi an d fixed access), to promote the migration from VM to 
containers at the edge and seamlessly integrate with ETSI NFV. Similarly, IETF is also working towards the 
standardisation of protocols and approaches to Service Function Chaining (SFC WG), abstractions (ACTN WG), 
Autonomic Networking ( ANIMA WG ) and Network Configuration models and protocols ( NETCONF WG ). 
Similarly, the development of 5G control and management solutions counts on a solid base of several Open Source 
Software, developed under the control of the Linux Foundation or ETSI, which have become the de facto standard 
for many SDN and NFV systems. Of particular interest to 5G-SOLUTIONS is the mainstream software solutions for 
SDN controllers ( OpenDaylight80 and ONOS81), the NFV MANO stacks ( ETSI Open Source MANO 82 and 
ONAP), the virtual ised infrastructure management ( OpenStack, Kubernetes, LXC/LXD) and  the overall 
integration (OPNFV). 
 
                                                 
74 3GPP TS 23.501: “System Architecture for the 5G System”, Release 15, 2017 
75 3GPP TS 23.502: “Procedures for the 5G System”, Release 15, 2017 
76 ETSI White Paper, “Network Functions Virtualisation (NFV); Management and Orchestration”, 2014, 
http://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_gs/NFV-MAN/001_099/001/01.01.01_60/gs_nfv-man001v010101p.pdf  
77 3GPP TS 28.530: “Management of network slicing in mobile networks; Concepts, use cases and requirements” 
78 3GPP TS 28.531: “Provisioning of network slicing for 5G networks and services” 
79 ITU-T Work Programme, “Network slicing orchestration and management”, http://www.itu.int/itu-t/workprog/wp_item.aspx?isn=10969  
80 OpenDaylight, https://www.opendaylight.org/  
81 ONOS, http://onosproject.org/  
82 Open Source MANO, https://osm.etsi.org/  
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  59  
The 5G SOLUTIONS consortium includes partners with key leadership roles in many of the aforementioned SDOs 
and initiatives (Table 2.9), which provides assurance that the concrete expectations of the project in terms of adoption 
of standards and mainstream OSS solutions for the preparation of the foundations of marketable 5G services will be 
fulfilled. The specific actions and resources (task T8.3) in order  to implement the joint two-fold interaction 
with SDOs aiming at a mutual benefit (win-win strategy) are: 
 
Inbound from 
SDOs and Open 
Source 
community 
5G-SOLUTIONS will develop  a smart KPI visualisation system  and leverage/extend an 
existing Cross-Domain Service Orchestrator (CDSO) enabling dynamic service lifecycle 
automation, APIs towards application providers and relevant interoperable interfaces towards 
ICT-17 5G facilities made of multiple 5G technologies and NFV/MEC control solutions. This 
will create a unique user-friendly 5G environment in which 5G network KPIs associated 
with innovative use cases in heterogeneous classes (i.e. eMBB, mMTC and URLL C) can 
be validated (e.g. from 3GPP R15, R16 and beyond as per ICT-17 upgrade roadmap). These 
activities will allow to: 
• Produce feedbacks to SDOs ( e.g. reports and presentations ) and Open Source 
communities of interest (e.g. filing of bugs and feature requests) on the applicability and 
performances in field of the latest standards and software releases. 
• Make 5G-SOLUTIONS a “community field trial” for SDOs and OSS communities of 
interest where to host interoperation tests and/or hacking events . This opportunity 
builds on the successful background of many partners in 5G -SOLUTIONS who have 
opened their trials to host similar events (e.g. Ericsson as part of the OPNFV lab, etc.) 
Outbound from 
SDOs and Open 
Source 
community 
The key research innovations to be developed in 5G-SOLUTIONS are required to enhance and 
fill in the gap of the current state-of-the-art for 5G when moving towards 5G services for 
operations in the field (e.g. multi-domain network slicing, cross-domain multi-tenant end-to-
end orchestration, smart real-time performance monitoring for KPI evaluation, etc.). This 
research in 5G -SOLUTIONS h as great alignment with the needs of SDOs and can 
concretely contribute interesting features to mainstream OSS software . The 5G -
SOLUTIONS partners have identified some preliminary ideas of potential contributions to 
SDOs and OSS community, summarised in Table 2.9. 
 
To maximise impact  on standardisation , 5G -SOLUTIONS will pursue a proactive approach in the project ’s 
execution phase through task T8.3 (deliverable D8.3) that consists of the following planning actions: 
1. Setting up the standardi sation activity roadmap by M8 (Deliverable D8.3) and continue the updating of  this 
roadmap based on the project’s work progress and in conjunction with the SDOs progress. 
2. Coordinating the project and standardi sation groups through constant monitoring of activities and regular 
conference calls with standardisation experts.  
3. Seizing opportunities to push technology contributions into ongoing specifications. 
4. Coordinating with standardisation experts to draft contributions ahead of standard meetings. 
5. Continuously promoting the project at standardisation-related workshops, panels, and summits.  
 
Table 2.9: 5G-SOLUTIONS joint standardisation actions 
Type Standards 
body, 
forum 
Specific group 
targeted 
Liaison 
partners 5G-SOLUTIONS contribution 
Protocols 3GPP 
SA1, SA2, SA4, 
SA5, CT1, CT3, 
CT4, RAN1, RAN3 
TIM 
TNOR 
• Overall system requirements and network slicing in the 
SA2/SA5 WGs. 
• Different functional splits for fronthaul in the RAN WG. 
SA5 NOKIA • 5G management services 
SA2, SA4 IRT • Contribution on 5G Edge cloud services with regards to MEC, 
CDN and MPEG Dash codecs (SAND/DASH) in the WGs. 
IETF 
ANIMA 
SFC 
ACTN 
TIM 
TNOR 
 
• ANIMA: common Autonomic Network control plane elements 
related to specific requirements of end-to-end 5G networks 
• SFC, ACTN: model transformations and test applicability of 
developed solutions/standards 
ONF NI WG, CM WG TIM, TNOR • Intent-based network and related interfaces83 
                                                 
83 ONF and ETSI/NFV announced a strategic partnership agreement to further the development of Network Functions Virtualisation (NFV) 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  60  
T&I WG CTTC • Continuously reporting the activities/innovations of the 
project to the Testing & Interoperability Working Group 
Manag. 
NGNM 
Network 
Management & 
Orchestration 
Spectrum 
TIM 
• Requirements for unified operation and management of site 
facilities (e.g. resource reservation and distribution) 
• Methodologies for interworking of different 5G facilities, 
testing tools and strategies 
Architecture 
ITU-T ITU-T 2020 FG, 
FG NET-2030 
TIM 
TNOR 
• Fronthaul/backhaul slicing, plus corresponding standardisation 
gap 
ETSI 
ZSM NOKIA, 
CTTC 
• End-to-end network slicing 
• Dynamic on the fly network slicing 
NFV-EVE005,  
ENI-ISG WIT • Architecture for NFV and SDN 
• AI/Machine-learning advancements in network management 
NFV CTTC • NFV and service orchestration for media content 
MEC CTTC • Content caching techniques 
5G-PPP VNF NURO • VNF development 
Services 
EBU BIS, CDN, FD, VS IRT 
• Contribution on 5G services on BIS (Broadcast Internet 
Services), CDN, FD (Future Distribution) and VS (Video 
Systems). 
 
2.2.3 Management and Protection of Knowledge and Data 
For the success of the project, the partners already agreed on explicit rules concerning IP ownership, access rights to 
any Background and results for the execution of the project, the protection of Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) and 
confidential information. 
 
In order to ensure a smooth execution of the project, and with reference to the Consortium Agreement , the project 
partners will grant each other and their affiliated companies, royalty -free Access Rights to their Background and 
results for the execution of the project. This will allow the researchers to execute the project to the best of their ability, 
without being hindered by administrative issues. The Consortium Agreement will define furt her details concerning 
the Access Rights for Exploitation to Background and results. Within the scope of the 5G-SOLUTIONS project, the 
consortium is committed to regulate IPR and confidentiality issues in line with H2020 guidelines. To achieve this, 
the pa rtners will build their Consortium Agreement (CA) on the basis of the MCARD -2020 model by 
DigitalEurope84. 5G -SOLUTIONS partners plan to have it signed before the Grant Agreement is signed.  More 
specifically, the Consortium Agreement will address the following IPR items: 
• Background provided by partners will be carefully listed in the CA in order to be established at project launch. 
This is a major step to enable the deployment of both open source building blocks (the open source components 
must be specified with their associated license) and equipment vendors functions or equipment (proprietary 
solutions with an R&D license that must be granted to a dedicated list of project partners) in the Living Labs.  
• Foreground developed in the course of the project will  be owned by the partner producing it (ownership and 
joined ownership rules will be defined in CA). Such development could also take the form of open source 
contributions, which are leveraged by the 5G-SOLUTIONS project especially if they create or enhance modules 
that could lead to de-facto standards. In such a case, it will be every partner’s responsibility to comply with the 
license scheme of the targeted open source alliance. 
• The dissemination of the project’s results, including publications, will be driven by the policy specified in the 
CA. The first step of this process will be a prior notification to other partners who will have a reasonable time 
window in which they can object to the publication in order to protect potential IPR from exposure. 
 
2.2.3.1 IPR Management Plan methodology 
The IPR Management Plan in 5G-SOLUTIONS will be based on the following structured methodology: 
Rules and 
agreements for 
the ownership 
and access to 
IP elements 
Definition of the policies for the ownership and access of all the IP elements identified, with the 
guiding principles of fairness across IP contributors and ensuring the freedom-to-operate to the 
overall project, including the long-term sustainability of its pilots. 
• Ownership and access to Background IP elements : explain and detail the results of the 
identification of Background IP elements. 
• Ownership and access to Foreground IP elements : the focus is on detailing some of the 
information related to the identification of Foreground IP elements, such as licensing model, 
joint ownership conditions (if applicable), access conditions for other partners, etc. 
                                                 
84 http://www.digitaleurope.org/Services/H2020-Model-Consortium-Agreement  
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  61  
Innovation and 
IP risk 
strategy 
The interdependencies analysed can help identify risks, such as: 
• During project execution: lack of access (by the indirect owner or by other project partners) 
to a specific Background element can hamper the execution of some activities in the 
workplan, the achievement of some Foreground elements and, ultimately, the achievement 
of some inventions. 
• After the end of the project : lack of, or unaffordable conditions in, access (by the indirect 
owner, or by other project partners) to specific Background/Foreground elements can block 
the usage of some Foreground elements and related inventions. The goal of this work is to 
identify the major innovation-related risks and to define a strategy to deal with each of them. 
• Innovation and IP risks analysis, to identify a number of risk parameters. 
• Innovation and IP risks management, providing a mitigation plan and a contingency plan. 
 
2.2.3.2 Management of Research Data 
The nature of the project is highly experimental, thus, in order to effectively and safely manage research data in a 
broader sense, it will be necessary to define a Data Management Plan (DMP) for making such data Findable, 
Accessible, Interoperable and Reusable (FAIR). In particular, the DMP  will define all procedures to be carried out 
to archive the data, including adopted standards and interfaces, and will make them available based on their nature.  
Research data types will include, at least: 
• Aggregated network data per flow/service slice p rovided to vertical industries, together with the relevant 
measured KPIs; 
• Aggregated network data per flow/service slice provided to the orchestration to enable its proper functioning 
and KPIs matching; 
• Aggregated network data about flow/service slice of network data gathered within each Living Lab; 
• Aggregated network data about flow/service slice of network data gathered at the interworking interfaces of 
different site facilities; 
• Specific flow/service statistics collected for debugging and/or failure management purposes; 
• Detailed data traces collected for specific purposes. 
• Software source codes, technical reports and manuals, managed as per the IPR methodology in Section 2.2.3.1.  
 
Dr. Pat O’Sullivan (ILS) will be responsible for the management of the project’s research data, storage and tagging 
procedures of research data, data classification and definition of access rules, etc. CEL will provide support for 
privacy and ethical issues. Knowledge will be securely stored and maintained in an internal document management 
system, such as EuresTools Workspace85 for the use by consortium partners. EuresTools Workspace provides a 
shared, secure work space in the cloud for project documents, spec ifically designed for H2020 projects.  The data 
within this work space will be maintained after the conclusion of the project for at least 2 years, so that the 
knowledge management will abide by the principles of discoverability, accessibility, intelligibil ity and 
availability also beyond the end of the project. The procedures related to the usage, management, maintenance and 
back-up of this repository will be defined in WP8 and in particular in deliverable D8.4 “Data Management Plan”. To 
support knowledge dissemination and impact creation, the project deliverables will be freely published on the project 
website for any user, as long as they are labelled as "Public" (as indicated in the list of deliverables in Table 3.1c in 
Section 3.1.5). In all other cases, a publishable version of the document will be produced and shared. Also, th e 
project’s website and its content will be available after the conclusion of the project for at least 2 years.  
 
2.2.4 Exploitation Plan, joint commercialisation strategy, business plan and sustainability 
2.2.4.1 Exploitation Plans  
Exploitation planning will start at the beginning of the project with market needs assessment (task T8.1) and will 
develop strategies and plans up to and including for mal patent filings. The exploitation strategy will follow two 
complementary directions: the first one linked to the Living Labs, and the second one relevant to the Open Innovation 
approach. According to Section 2.2.4. 2, as part of the innovation management process, three (3) key exploitable 
innovations of 5G-SOLUTIONS, having the strongest innovation and commercialisation potential, will be selected 
for both EU and US patent filing, thus meeting a key imperative from the consortium that the strategic IP from the 
project is protected “for” Europe and the associated competitive advantages are retained “within Europe”. 
The project will deliver robust industry demonstrators, field trialled with industry leaders, to TRL 6 or higher, and a 
set of commercialisation actions to support sustainable market take -up. Dr. Pat O’Sullivan (ILS) will serve as 5G -
SOLUTIONS Innovation & IPR Manager (IM) and be responsible for identifying and managing innovation from the 
project, advising the Project Management Board (PMB), on the scope and potential of the innovations arising from 
the project, and discerning IP at regular checkpoints. The IM will be supported by an Innovation & 
                                                 
85 https://www.eurescom.eu/eurestools.html  
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  62  
Commercialisation Board, as depicted in Figure 3.3, drawn from members of the consortium with expertise in IPR 
management, especially in the case of management of applications by third parties and experience in successf ul 
commercialisation and spin-outs.  
 
Patrick Durkin from ILS will assume the role of the Commercialisation Manager (CM) who will work closely with 
the IM and the PMB, and will collectively provide leadership to the consortiums’ commercial opportunities such as, 
third-parties licensing, commercialisation of project outputs, as well as commercial dissemination and exploitation 
activities of the project. The CM will help the consortium identify and promote commercial opportunities relevant to 
consortium members, the 5G ecosystem community, SMEs, industry, research organisations and academia.  
 
5G-SOLUTIONS exploitation plan will be part of the Business Development Plan (deliverable D8. 2) and will 
constitute a live document from the beginning of the project ; although completed at M33, it will persist after the 
project’s completion. T o complement the exploitation plan, Table 2.10 provides a non -exhaustive list of the 
individual exploitation intentions and activities planned by each partner. 
 
Table 2.10: Initial exploitation intentions of 5G-SOLUTIONS consortium 
Partner  Initial Exploitation Intentions 
TIM 
The coordination of the project 5G SOLUTIONS represents a clear opportunity for TIM to investigate 
(in a real and multi -national environment) the feasibility of the 5G trials with a particular focus on the 
integration of verticals needs and interests. TIM will use the results from 5G SOLUTIONS to consolidate 
the achievements in the 5G experimental activities at European level. TIM considers the cooperation with 
the most significant players in the sector gathered in the consortium a viable opportunity to trigger broad 
European-wide 5G adoption. The inclusion of the verticals and the evaluation of their needs is of 
paramount importance for the business development direction of the company in the future evolution of 
the telecommunications market. The network slicing and the orchestration of the slices among different 
network segments is relevant from a technical point of view, as well as the consolidation of the KPIs and 
the related performance ensured by 5G future deployments. These changes need to be thoroughl y 
validated and 5G-SOLUTIONS fully answers this need.  
NOKIA 
Build on the results of 5G-SOLUTIONS to validate the 5G portfolio with a variety of industry verticals 
to assure its customers that 5G will meet the required KPIs. Enhance the network slicing and ZTC features 
of NOKIA’s CBND. Enhance and extend the understanding of these technologies inside  NOKIA and 
specifically in the Cloudband group. 
APPART 
Extend the company’s R&D activities as a means of achieving further growth in terms of portfolio 
diversity and customer base. APPART intends to work closely with the rest consortium partners in order 
to participate actionably in joint efforts for fulfilling innovation and commercialisation actions. 
A2T 
Technology transfer of new research ideas and prototypes developed within the project towards relevant 
players of the power industry, to further strengthen the current collaborations and partnerships. In this 
regard, A2T will provide contributions to the project considering requirements from vertical partners 
involved in the Smart Energy Living Lab. The validated use cases within the project will be industrialised 
and proposed at different players of the energy industry, starting from  ENEL, with whom A2T has 
already a commercial partnership for a large-scale deployment of EV smart charging solutions. 
CTTC 
Stimulate a number of technology transfer and IPR generation activities. Enrich know -how in a variety 
of technologies, tools and systems such as Multi -CDN, User Generated Content, Cooperative Media 
Production, 5G slicing, MEC, etc. This know -how, coupled with the fact that  CTTC is member of the 
standardisation bodies ETSI, IETF, ONF will allow us to actively participate in these standardisation fora 
and to disseminate 5G -SOLUTIONS ‘s cutting ed ge results. Extend strategic alliances with 5G 
stakeholders at national and international levels to facilitate the bidirectional exchange of information on 
R&D trends and technological needs, stimulate access to labs and R&D equipment, etc. 
CEL 
Advance knowledge in 5G technologies. This will reinforce CEL’s position in the market as innovative 
service provider and will enlarge its network to create new opportunities with new partners and 
customers, for further strategic services. Project results will thus enrich CEL’s offering in the educational 
field for new training courses and moreover in the consultancy services for clients , such as the public 
administration or private companies (e.g. small, medium and big industries) focused on 5G technologies, 
data protection issues and GDPR compliance. 
EBOS 
Advance knowledge and reinforce understanding in 5G technologies extending the company’s R&D 
activities and extending the capabilities and functionalities of front -end dashboards and friendly to use 
open standards APIs. Apply the results in the company’s product portfolio for developing new innovative 
applications and solutions, and expanding their customer base. Identify potential patents for IP protection 
in collaboration with the commercialisation and innovation consortium members. 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  63  
ENEL 
Boost the transfer of services developed in the project to targeted markets; p roper planning of actions 
and assignment of roles in order to foster the direct and indirect exploitation of the project results ; 
synergies with the support and services offered by European energy communities to  approach early 
adopters; the promotion of project results towards targeted audiences, via up-to-date dissemination tools; 
awareness building of the technological solution to the relevant market sectors. 
FNET Improve its customer experience and differentiate the company in the market. FNET’s aim is to increase 
brand equity among event spectators, resulting in offering a richer user experience, thus increasing 
customers’ loyalty, while attracting new consumers. The outcomes of the 5G-SOLUTIONS project, can 
be embedded to FNET’s infrastructure, in order to provide added value services to the customers. 
GLAN 
Scale and progress the case studies that we will be involved with post project towards enabling GLAN’s 
plants with increased efficiency, intelligence and data analytics capabilities and being ready for 5G 
adoption when it is commercially rolled out. 
IBM Novel findings in scalable machine learning model design  and in 5G related IoT will be published in 
journals. New services will be developed in IBM Cloud Ecosystem to target 5G network management. 
ILS 
Broaden its R&D expertise profile in client and server based digital ecosystems platforms, technologies 
and client facing solutions to the 5G sector, in turn helping the consortium deliver strong and credible 
scientific, commercial, societal and IP outputs. Of particu lar interest to  ILS is building new strategic 
relations with consortium partners in pursuit of joint innovation and joint commercialisation ; in turn 
leveraging ILS’s reach to the VC and Angel investor community that has evidenced positive progress 
and advancement of commercial opportunities for SMEs to date, as well as motivating go -to-market 
opportunities with and for partners in the consortium.  
IRT 
IRT will further complement and extend its excellent media technology expertise in the field of 5G, 
reaching technology decisions regarding future content production and distribution. Through 5G -
SOLUTIONS IRT plans to offer new test facilities for 5G technology and the project results will also 
help to advance  IRT’s consultancy portfolio for IP -based content d istribution using cloud edge 
technology. 5G -SOLUTIONS outcomes will further corroborate  IRT’s role in competitive 3GPP 
standardisation groups.  
IREN 
5G-SOLUTIONS represents one of  IREN main solutions for a supported design and test of future 
innovations. IREN is willing to find and test innovative solutions for its customers in the energy field: 
demand side management and electric vehicles massive rollout. Both of them must rely on an effective 
and broadband communication infrastructure able to support a rollout, in both national and EU levels. 
IRIS 
Evolve PATBox platform for 5G in preparation for 5G roll out and produce a whitepaper, for promoting 
PATBox in the industry highlighting the benefits from 5G data -driven manufacturing.  Extend the 
boundaries of hyperspectral imaging (HSI) for industrial use. 5G will open up HSI to the cloud, allowing 
IRIS to further increase the deployment of this technology in industry. Produce a whitepaper related to 
the findings from use cases UC 1.1 - UC 1.4 field trials with P&G.  
LIVEU 
Expand market share by penetrating into more vertical services apart from the media, such as public 
safety, emergency communications, smart city (video transmission over 5G), reliable broadband multi-
link for safety and infotainment data delivery in automotive. 
LMI 
Disseminate the results from 5G-SOLUTIONS aiming to increase the know-how of Ericsson’s engineers, 
managers and product development leaders, and also of furthering the discussions on 5G that we have 
with our partners. Strengthen and enlarge collaboration within the EU. 
NTNU 
As an academic partner, NTNUs exploitation plans are primarily related to the advancement of 
knowledge in the field of industrial use  of 5G technology. Through the planned introduction of a 5G 
infrastructure in the NTNU robotics and Industry 4.0 laboratories that will be part of the RCN project 
Manulab, NTNU will be able to provide valuable research and innovation services to Norwegian industry 
looking to reap the potential benefits of 5G technology. NTNU also aims to author at least 4 academic 
articles in collaboration with the industrial partners in the project, which will be published in relevant 
international conferences and journals. 
NURO 
Exploit the software modules developed by  NURO for the Smart City Living Lab. Make use of such 
software components in end -user products on a smaller scale. Exploit 5G -SOLUTIONS results as a 
benchmark to enter a new market area, particularly the 5G software modules and IoT/VR  sensor 
technologies that can be used to develop IoT and VR solutions for the market.  
OMES 
OMES recognises the importance of 5G validation for their OPS data hub to ensure efficiency, speed, 
capacity, latency, reliability, accuracy and timeliness in data input and extraction for smart factories in 
the food & beverage industry. Produce a whitepaper relating to the benefits of 5G for driving increased 
operational efficiencies in the food and beverage industry, towards data-driven plants.    
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  64  
UOP 
UOP aims to advance their research staff’s knowledge, enhance collaboration and partnerships in 5G 
through liaison activities and participation to major 5G conference events. Produce and publish articles 
and papers for academic publications in journals and conferences. Investigate business opportunities with 
5G stakeholders. 
PBGS PGBS’ intent is to leverage the findings in the Factories of the Future Living Lab by applying them in a 
greater scale within one of their European production plans. 
PIIU 
5G-SOLUTIONS results will be exploited by PIIU in the context of specific offers to Italian Industries, 
especially SMEs, through which are envisaged significant advantages for the delivery of services to the 
end users. PIIU aims at leveraging and extending its current expertise in the 5G business cases, with 
respect to market dynamics, business models and value chains. The acquired knowledge will be used to 
setup advanced workshops and management courses that are part of PIIU current activities.  
TNOR 
Advance knowledge, expertise and TNOR’s (i) experimental and trial facilities for 5G network solutions 
enabling and supporting platforms and solutions easily accessible and further exploitable by vertical 
sector parties in the areas of factory of the future, smart harbour/port/industrial field, as well as for smart 
city and a variety of IoT applications; (ii) capabilities in collaboration methodologies and execution; (iii) 
multi-purpose 5G RAN based network solutions enabling and exploiting opportunities and synergies of 
concurrent 5G usage for multiple verticals enabled by new generation of cloud MEC. 
WIT 
WIT will investigate the potential for a spin -off/start-up business, examining how the generated know -
how and IP that can be utilised in an agreed way, to facilitate the development of new businesses.  
Reinforce WIT’s understanding of 5G network in different verticals and further consolidate expertise in 
5G, ITS and relevant areas. The research work of 5G will be carried out in both the application level and 
the theoretical study level, to validate core 5G slicing, virtualisation technologies, architect ures and 
corresponding KPIs linked to specific use cases and scenarios within 5G-SOLUTIONS.  
YARA 
Yara has ambitions to be a first mover into 5G -SOLUTIONS for the factory operations and the 
autonomous operations at Herøya. Of particular interest is the bu ilding of new strategic relations with 
consortium partners to be able to fully utilise the technology in Yara’s logistics operations. Understand 
how 5G technology can enable autonomous operations in the smart port and enable the digital factory.  
 
2.2.4.2 Joint Commercialisation Strategy and business development plan outline 
Turing brilliant research into successful commercial products is a complex task with more failures than successes. 
Most failures occur because there is a lack of Product/Market fit 86 or to put it simply, the product that is built is not 
what the market wants to buy. To orientate the outcomes from 5G-SOLUTIONS towards viable commercial solutions 
and assets , we will adopt a focused commercialisation strategy with measurable outcomes by embedding 
commercial best practice into the project’s lifecycle. All commercialisation tasks will focus on delivering solutions 
that are required by the market and a  comprehensive Business Development Plan ( deliverable D8. 2) will be 
developed and continuously updated as part of task T8.2 and will constitute a living document throughout the project. 
 
The completed Business Development Plan will aim to understand viable and commercially relevant solutions, assets 
and services from the project by taking a broad cross -consortium perspective, with credibility built on a foundation 
of embracing industry best practice for bringing new products to market. 
 
Commercialisation Process and Team 
Patrick Durkin from ILS (Commercialisation Manager) has significant experience in bringing new products to market 
and will both lead the commercialisation process and guide the consortium during the project, including the 
development of a detailed Business Development Plan that encapsulates the various innovation opportunities across 
the consortium (both part of task T8.2). The rest of the project’s commercialisation team members are the WP4-WP6 
Living Lab cluster leaders (i.e. IBM, IRIS and LIVEU) who will analyse and identify, together with their Living Lab 
partners, those use cases whose business potential has been validated and which have the highest commercialisation 
potential. Consequently, these partners will create the appropriate commercial structure to deliver s upport for their 
respective outputs beyond the end of the project. All are experienced in industry -oriented research and technology 
development at TRL 6-9 and critically, they all possess time-tested experience of commercialisation. A formal cross-
licensing agreement will be created by the commercialisation team members during the project to support the eventual 
commercial vehicle that is created, with the Business Development Plan providing the roadmap for future commercial 
exploitation (resources required, funding, go-to-market first steps etc.). 
 
Key exploitable results 
The key exploitable result s of 5G-SOLUTIONS are its innovative vertical use cases, which are planned to be 
promoted as commercial opportunities as an outcome of the project. The use cases are expected to be commercialised 
                                                 
86 https://www.cbinsights.com/research/startup-failure-reasons-top/  
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  65  
through a cloud -based service, with the licencing model consistent with well -established software -as-a-service 
models and based on the number of users/servers/connected devices.  The commercialisation team members are 
collectively committed to finding the appropriate commercialisation structure that will ensure appropriate economic 
impact from 5G -SOLUTIONS. In addition, to boost 5G vertical service uptake, both the smart KPI visua lisation 
system as well as the application intent-based APIs will be open sourced within Europe and offered as a free service. 
 
Business Model Canvas (High-Level) 
 
 
IP Protection and patents 
A recent (strategic) imperative from the E uropean Commission is boosting patent protection of strategic and 
commercially sensitive innovation from EC R&I funded projects. Progress on this imperative is evidenced in several 
recent communications from the EC87, 88, 89, as well as recently enacted EC tenders 90, 91 that promote the objective 
of boosting the commercialisation of EU research results.  5G-SOLUTIONS respects and responds to the above 
strategic mandate and imperative from the EC. In this respect, Dr. Pat O’Sullivan from  ILS, who has substantial 
experience in IP filings at both USPTO and EU PO (over 300 successfully granted patents) will act as the project’s 
Innovation & IPR Manager. ILS will allocate €120.000 of its budget towards assisting and managing three (3) 
successful patent filings  at both EU and US patent offices , supporting 5G -SOLUTIONS’s commercialisation 
strategy. The patent cost breakdown, shown in Table 2.11, is based on average actual figures obtained from patent 
advocates. 
Table 2.11: Patent cost breakdown 
Item per patent Costs (€) Justification 
Patent drafting costs 12.000 
Development of a patent -office compliant patent application that includes the 
required legal narratives for detailed description and specification, drawings, the 
(legal) background and inventive landscape, the legal text that accurately 
describes the inven tion, the patent claim set, and formal reports for EC audit 
compliance.  
Patent filings in the 
EU and in the USA 6.500 
EUPO & USPTO filings and registration fees, associated publication and request 
for patent office evaluation fees, patent office fees, translation, examination fees 
and associated taxes. 
European Patent Office 
(EUPO) prosecution & 
appeal 
11.500 
EUPO first office action, grant and national validation, EUPO prosecution feels 
that are split into pre-grant and post-grant prosecution, and legal fees to manage 
the interaction with the EUPO. 
USPTO prosecution & 
appeal 10.000 USPTO first office action, USPTO RCE (request for continued examination), 
grant and national validation as well as USPTO prosecution feels (pre-grant and 
                                                 
87 https://ec.europa.eu/growth/industry/intellectual-property_en  
88 http://ec.europa.eu/trade/policy/accessing-markets/intellectual-property/  
89 https://ec.europa.eu/docsroom/documents/26583  
90 EASME/H2020/2018/008 - https://etendering.ted.europa.eu/cft/cft-display.html?cftId=3518  
91 2018/RTD/B3/OP/PP-7141-2018 - https://etendering.ted.europa.eu/cft/cft-display.html?cftId=3655  
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  66  
post-grant prosecution), as well as associated legal fees to manage the interaction 
with the USPTO. 
TOTAL 40.000  
 
The aim is to protect and retain the commercially strategic IP “for Europe” and “within Europe”, in turn giving 
commercialising actors within the consortium a strategic competitive advantage on a world -wide stage. Hence, the 
consortium’s intention to see patents filed in the names of those who have pioneered the inventive steps, as follows: 
▪ To protect the strategic IP within Europe, one  patent is anticipated to be filed in the joint work between 
APPART and EBOS and in particular, in the fusing of APPART’s telco analytics platform with EBOS front-end 
dashboards and cognitive machine learning analytics . This in turn will secure joint IP protection for APPART 
and EBOS in a commercial SME partnership.  
▪ The additional two patents will be discerned in an open and unbiased consortium-wide competition, where the 
Innovation & IPR Manager will work with the consortium ’s Living Lab partners to collectively agree  on the 
most commercially valuable/promising innovation from the innovative use cases validated at the Living Labs. It 
is also anticipated that a commercialisation weighting will be systematically applied in the adjudication process, 
with the end goal of securing patent protection in areas that the consortium has affirmed will guide a commercial 
trajectory, thus securing a competitive advantage to organisations in the consortium.  
 
Competitive Landscape 
5G-SOLUTIONS is focused on  validating the performance capabilities of 5G pre -commercial infrastructures in 
successfully empowering new innovative vertical industry services that cannot be currently offered by the existing 
4G mobile technology, since they require 5G performance capa bilities. Therefore, 5G -SOLUTIONS has several 
Unique Value Propositions as outlined in the Business Model Canvas and explained in Section 1.4.2, that have the 
potential to revolutionise the 5G market by commercially offering such compelling services after the project’s 
completion. 5G-SOLUTIONS will become a European alternative to US and Asia-based competitors. 
 
Revenue Model 
5G-SOLUTIONS revenue will be generated from selling, through a subscription-based model the innovative vertical 
services, through bundled products, considering that each service is addressed to different market segments, spanning 
from consumer to enterprise users. We anticipate three bundled products , corresponding to the clustering of 
services in 3 target groups as per LL clustering, i.e. (a) Industry 4.0, (b) smart urban ecosystem and (c) enhanced 
user experience. Furthermore, we anticipate 3 distinct types of end-users per bundled service: Personal, Professional 
and Enterprise with different levels of functionality appropriate to each type, and each with a different price point. 
Revenue model growth projections tables will be developed for each of the bundled products within the scope of the 
Business Development Plan (task T8.2). 
 
2.2.4.3 Sustainability beyond 5G-SOLUTIONS 
Sustainability of the 5G-SOLUTIONS’s work beyond the end of the project is a key objective set and agreed by the 
consortium. This will be achieved as follows: 
a) Through open sourcing significant aspects of the project’s innovation (see Section 1.4.1), existing 5G actors, 
SMEs, research and academic bodies, and other 5G -PPP projects will have the necessary access right and 
approvals to extend, advance and build upon 5G-SOLUTIONS’s work, in turn leveraging  same in current and 
future 5G projects. Consequently, 5G-SOLUTIONS will open source the majority of its innovation (section 
1.4.1) with a view to encouraging reuse and extensibility across Europe.  
b) Through the evolution of the use cases to commercial services that can be offered to consumers and businesses. 
The business potential of each use case will be validated in the Living Labs and the Business Development Plan 
(deliverable 8.1B) will analyse the results to identify and select those use cases which will be clustered and 
offered as a bundled service to the market. 
 
2.2.5 Data Management & Open Access Plan 
5G-SOLUTIONS is fully committed to open source, and the intention is to open source the majority of the innovation 
and technology advancements. This acknowledges the importance to Europe that future projects build on previously 
funded efforts as well as open dissemination and sharing. 5G-SOLUTIONS’s also intends to file 3 patents, as 
analysed in section 2.2.4.2. Hence, strategic Intellectual Property (IP) filings will be carefully managed in a way that 
will not impede the underlying aspirations to open source and make available the majority of 5G-SOLUTIONS’s 
innovation and technology to European researchers, SMEs, universities and industry to ben efit from and to build 
on/from. Specifically, special attention and consideration will be given to IP, information and data character ised as 
EU CONFIDENTIAL, guided by 5G-SOLUTIONS’s Innovation and Commercialisation Managers, as well as close 
consultation with 5G-SOLUTIONS’s ethics leader in the case of data privacy/confidentiality. Access will be granted 
only to authorised project participants where needed and where appropriate.  
 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  67  
For any other project outcomes with public level of dissemination, wider dis tribution will be considered and 
examined in the Data Management Plan (DMP). With respect to data exploitation, the DMP will determine how other 
stakeholders may exploit the data and how the data can be verified after it has been deposited. The partners will also 
use EuresTools, as explained in Section 2.2.3.2, to store and curate 5G-SOLUTIONS data where open access is 
pursued. The project will use established standards and non-proprietary formats for data collection as far as possible, 
to support future exploitation of the data either by project partners or by external organisations where open access is 
implemented.  
 
Green Open Access will be considered as the publishing method of the results. This strategy is directly related to the 
“Open” paradigm that will be used for publishing project results. The initial version of the DMP will be conduc ted 
by M6 as part of WP 8 (task T8.4, deliverable D8.4), and will evolve during the lifetime of the project in order to 
present the status of the project's reflections on data management. The final version will be delivered in M32. All 
personal data will be preserved by the end-user companies at their discretion. No personally identifiable data will be 
shared or will remain with the partners after the project ends without prior consent. If individuals choose to withdraw 
from a user -trial, their personal data  will be removed from the databases.  Open access is supported by the 
dissemination and exploitation approach of 5G-SOLUTIONS results. 
 
2.2.5.1 GDPR & 5G-SOLUTIONS 
The 5G-SOLUTIONS consortium has carefully and thoroughly deliberated on GDPR implications for all aspects of 
the project during the proposal preparation. With the help of legal and privacy expertise in the consortium (see for 
instance the participation of partner CEL specially dedicated to legal, privacy and ethical aspects), as a general rule, 
the consortium has collectively affirmed that none of the data managed, shared, processed or analysed will pertain to 
personal data of any EU citizens, as the nature of the 5G-SOLUTIONS data sets are highly network, test, protocol 
and instrumentation related. In the exceptional case of personal data processing, Ms Carmela Occhipinti (CEL) will 
serve as the project’s Data Protection Officer (DPO) assisted by the data privacy single point of contact  of each of 
the consortium’s members, to manage such data (see Section 5.1.3). 5G-SOLUTIONS intention is to ensure robust 
and compliant policies for the handling of data, in compliance with the EU Data Protection Directive, GDPR and the 
national legislation. This effort will also tie in to the ethical protocol and data management plan for the project, which 
stipulates the ethical and data management principles that the 5G-SOLUTIONS partners will adhere to in their work.  
 
Privacy-by-design data protection context 
In order to be compl iant to GDPR and all other privacy regulations we will use a privacy-by-design approach; this 
means all project results will be developed with privacy and data protection in mind from the design phase. Privacy 
by design means building the principles, criteria and premises for good practices of privacy into technological tools 
that by their nature will have significant powers of intrusion. Privacy by design means that the technology is self -
regulating in terms of privacy. Instead of going as far as it goes in terms of data collection, storage or analysis, privacy 
by design shapes the very design characteristics of a technological device so that by its very operation advances the 
value of privacy. 5G-SOLUTIONS contributes directly and concretely to advance the ambition of privacy by design. 
It regards privacy as an end rather than as a necessary sacrifice to be made in order to achieve goals that otherwise 
would be in conflict with principles of privacy and data protection. 5G-SOLUTIONS builds privacy into the notion 
and system of personal data with a special attention to use case applications.  
 
From the legal perspective, privacy-by-design implies enhancing integration between policy-makers working with 
questions of citizens and industry actors who seek to innovate technological solution to data protection challenges 
within the scope of valid legal standards. In accordance with the notion of privacy by design technological innovation 
will seek to make ‘smart’ investments and design. Products of privacy by design thinking will not waste resources 
on developing technologies, whose realisation will provide services that fall outside the scope of the intention of the 
law. At the same time, privacy by design also expresses itself in the opposite direction. A close eye to the development 
of technological solutions to security challenges, will guide legislators, the courts and police and security services to 
save and better direct resources toward measures that have a real application in the evolving security landscape. 
 
From the ethical and societal perspective, privacy-by-design means developing privacy enhancing technologies in 
such a way as to be in correspondence with the needs, norms and expectations of society. Privacy enhancing 
technology should not aim or undertake more or other than the benchmarks that society itself sets. Privacy by design 
involves, on the one hand remaining vigilant to changes society in order to adjust technological innovation to reflect 
these changes and, on the other hand, keeping channels of communication open toward society at large such that 
technological changes do not catch citizens unprepared. Lack of transparency, according to the notion of privacy by 
design, is not only counterproductive, it is a direct cause of insecurity.  
 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  68  
Section 3: Implementation
3.1 Work plan — Work packages, deliverables  
 
3.1.1 Overall Structure of the Work Plan 
The project is organised in nine (9) Work Packages (WPs) that correspond to the project’s objectives, coordinated by 
project management activities (WP 10). Each WP is led by a project partner particularly experienced in the 
corresponding area, so as to ensure the best practice and work efficiency.  
 
3.1.2 Work Packages Timing and Key Dependencies 
Figure 3.1 summarises the project structure, showing the names  of the WPs and the relationship between them. In 
addition to project management (WP10), the WPs are organised in 3 main groups: 
▪ Providing Technical Foundations (WP1-WP3): Conceive, design, implement 5G-SOLUTIONS technological 
enablers and interface with the 5G ICT-17 infrastructure to enable vertical service field trial validation. 
 
▪ Enabling Industrial Acceptance (WP4-WP7): Validate and transform core technical and business results to a 
state suitable for deployment in an operational environment. 
 
▪ Supporting Dissemination and Exploitation (WP8-WP9): Carry out activities during the project, and planning 
activities beyond the project, to prepare for and bring about the promised impact. 
 
 
Figure 3.1: PERT Chart and WP dependencies 
 
 3.1.3 List of Work Packages (Table 3.1a) 
 
Table 3.1a: List of work packages 
WP# Work Package Title Lead 
Participant 
Person-
Months 
Start 
Month 
End 
Month 
WP1 Requirements analysis, use cases and methodologies LMI 139 1 26 
WP2 5G infrastructure setup and operational readiness NOKIA 105 2 34 
WP3 Technological enablers for Living Labs APPART 137 3 34 
WP4 Industry 4.0 field trials IRIS 127 11 34 
WP5 Smart urban environment field trials IBM 180 11 34 
WP6 Enhanced user experience field trials LIVEU 107 11 34 
WP7 Multi-vertical concurrent validation field trials TNOR 115 12 34 
WP8 Commercialisation activities, IP management and 
international networking ILS 136 1 33 
WP9 Dissemination, communication and capacity building CTTC 161 1 36 
WP10 Project management  TIM 84 1 36 
Total person- months 1291  
 
Figure 3.2 (Gantt chart) displays the time dimension of the project, which will be implemented in 36 months. As the 
project follows an agile approach, there is a number of iterations per work package and task. Milestones  and 
deliverables are represented with MS# and letter (D), respectively. 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  69  
 
Figure 3.2: Gantt chart 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  70  
3.1.4 Work Packages description (Table 3.1b) 
 
Table 3-2 [Table 3.1b]: Work package description 
 
WP # WP1 Lead 
beneficiary: 
  LMI Start month  1 End month  26 
WP title Requirements analysis, use cases and methodologies 
Participant# 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 
Short name 
of 
participant 
TIM 
NOKIA 
APPART 
A2T 
CTTC 
CEL 
EBOS 
FNET 
ENEL 
GLAN 
IBM 
ILS 
IRT 
IREN 
IRIS 
LIVEU 
LMI 
NTNU 
NURO 
OMES 
UOP 
PGBS 
PIIU 
TNOR 
WIT 
YARA 
PM per 
participant 9 5 7 2 7 5 6 8 2 3 5 3 10 2 9 2 12 5 3 3 4 3 3 8 10 3 
 
Objectives  
• To define in detail appropriate post -exploitable use cases linked to specific target 5G KPIs considering and 
bridging the vertical user point of view (PoV) with the service provider PoV and the solution provider PoV. 
• To analyse the challenges and define the requirements for the provision of a cross-domain, multi, concurrent 
E2E service orchestrator with network slicing and virtualisation capabilities and to define detailed role division 
and interaction between ICT-17 facilities and 5G-SOLUTIONS project. 
• To leverage, build upon and extend previous and ongoing work from EU funded 5G-PPP projects and the 2nd 
phase of 5G standardisation. 
• To produce a set of methodologies to enable (a) the technological and business validation of 5G E2E managed 
quality connectivity (including cross-border and hierarchical resource and service aspects) and associated 
control and management within and across verticals ; (b) the definition of the test report s format, parameter, 
test points, and benchmarking of the results for a unified and reliable outcome. 
 
Description of work 
 
Task 1.1 - Definition and detailed analysis of vertical use cases/scenarios, baseline and corresponding target 
KPIs (FNET, all partners)  
The aim of this task is to capture requirements from the end-user stakeholders, including the articulation of detailed 
use case scenarios and usability needs, and relevant target technological and business KPIs which will be validated 
in the Living Labs . Specifically, this task will be divided into two key sub tasks: (a) systematic  compilation of 
current use cases features and capabilities (b) requirements analysis. A requirements’ capture will involve the 
documentation of end-users needs  and opinions about new innovative vertical use cases that require 5G 
performance capabilities in the domains of Factories of the Future, Smart Energy, Smart Cities, IoT, Media & 
Entertainment. Such use cases will be mapped to specific target KPI and SLA values (e.g. throughput, mobility, 
latency, density, reliability, positioning accuracy, coverage, service provisioning time, QoS, QoE, etc.), which will 
set the baseline for conducting the actual measurements during the field trials.  
 
Task 1.2 – Analysis of challenges and requirements for 5G E2E multi, concurrent and cross-domain service 
management and orchestration including interaction with ICT -17 facilities (LMI, NOKIA, IRT, TNOR, 
WIT) 
The evolution of NFV is faced with the reality that the initial MANO architecture is not adequate to address the 
service providers’ underlying requirement to instil the agility of DevOps principles. Rather than setting up and 
managing services in network domains separately and manually, the expectation on 5G networks is that cross -
domain E2E s ervices will be provisioned, deployed, managed, and retired in a DevOps manner, with minimal 
manual intervention. In addition, where slicing capabilities are exposed by network domains, those E2E services 
will be deployable on network slices. We will also explore the integrity of OSS features being kept under cross 
data correlation from low level virtualisation and the vertical industry requirement, which is agnostic of the 
underlying telecom infrastructure. The core focus of Task 1.2 is to explore the above challenges in the context of 
a framework that aligns with industry standards, yet is innovative and provides leadership beyond what is included 
today in current approaches. 
End-to-end service provisioning with slicing capabilities [NOKIA]: In this task, we shall design how to leverage 
the NOKIA orchestrator to support end -to-end inter -domain lifecycle management. We  will make use of the 
available plugin interfaces to extend the functionality to allow management of closed loop services for network 
slicing. In addition, the plugins implementing the interfaces towards the network domain orchestrators will be 
designed to allow configuration and monitoring of the virtual and physical resources that are providing the network 
slices that the end -to-end services are running on. We will also investigate the issue of monitoring the verticals 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  71  
SLAs and analyse the data coming from the verticals to allow for efficient orchestration of the end-to-end services. 
The interaction and integration with the ICT-17 facilities (south-bound to 5G -SOLUTIONS) will also be 
accommodated, as well as north-bound to customer facing systems or portals.   
Proposed solutions of slicing issues between core and access in 5G mobile networks  [LMI]: The radio and core 
networks differ in the manner in which they implement slicing and in which such slices are configured. We will 
examine how services using network slices across the RAN and core networks can be provisioned and managed 
transparently. We will investigate how common slices can be created across the two domains, and how traffic can 
be routed and shaped between these slice fragments whilst preserving a common view of the end to end slide. In 
addition, we will investigate how services running across slices can be optimised using predictive o ptimisation - 
we will try to understand how common slicing patterns can be predicted, in an effort to formulate a set of training 
patterns that can be used to train predictive and proactive configuration changes.  
 
Task 1.3 – Leverage, build upon and extend previous and ongoing work from EU funded 5G-PPP projects 
and 2nd phase of 5G standardisation (TIM, NOKIA, CTTC, IBM, IRT, UOP, PIIU, TNOR, WIT) 
In this task we will capitalise on 5G-PPP Phase 1 findings, 5G-PPP Phase 2 and Phase 3 projects and will leverage 
assets and results for use in 5G -SOLUTIONS. The cooperation with the other projects in the call and with the 
relevant entities in 5G -PPP is ensured by this task. The results achieved from 5G-EVE and 5G-VINNI projects 
will be analysed in 5G-SOLUTIONS and shared with other 5G international initiatives, including GSMA, in order 
to consolidate a common vision towards the wide deployment of 5G technologies . This will be realised by a 
continuous exchange of information among the projects, facilitated by the activities of the Working Groups in 5G-
IA and 5G-PP as well as through the Steering Board and the Technical Board, where the Project Coordinator (PC) 
and the Technical Manager (TM) of the project are actively involved, respectively. 
A specific pre-standardisation workshop and dissemination events will be organised jointly with the other 5G-PPP 
projects, to draw a complete picture of the achievements in Europe. Videos and other dissemination material will 
also be prepared to illustrate the performed activities from a joint perspective. 
 
Task 1. 4 – Methodology for the definition of test reports format, parameters and test points, and 
benchmarking for the results (WIT, APPART, CTTC, EBOS, FNET, GLAN, IRT, IRIS, NTNU, OMES, UOP, 
PBGS, YARA) 
This task will focus on defining the methodology and toolset for a comprehensive and robust test analysis of the 
5G technologies and the vertical use cases being created within the 5G-SOLUTIONS project. Working closely 
with the partners defining the scenarios to be trialled in the Living Labs environment, we will specify formats for 
a suite of test cases to measure the functionality and performance of the innovative solutions being put forward. 
These test artefacts will be captured in a suitable test case management tool that will integrate seamlessly with the 
development process.  Based on the requirement to deliver outputs that have commercial value and potential, there 
will be a significant emphasis put on Quality of Service (QoS) to give  a qualitive measurement of test execution 
and on Quality of Experience (QoE) to gauge objective human experience. We will also ensure that the test strategy 
examines the improvement over previous 4G capabilities. Other test methodologies will include resource scaling, 
cross-domain interaction and entire platform testing. The test process will fit neatly into the project’s iterative agile 
development process and allow for implementation of a Test-Driven Development methodology incorporating unit 
tests and acceptance tests. 
 
Task 1.5 – Methodology for the technological and business validation of 5G E2E connectivity and associated 
management within and across verticals (TNOR, APPART, CTTC, CEL, EBOS, ILS, IRIS, NTNU) 
The methodology will entail acceptance test procedure s for conducting both the technological and business 
validation of the use cases considering the associated service management. In particular, as far as the technological 
validation is concerned, we will define the procedures for collecting the data feeds from the ICT-17 measurement 
portals, stating also how these feeds will be used and analysed by the KPI visualisation system to produce and 
present the KPI values in a graphical form. Threshold limits for the benchmarking of the results will also be defined 
per target KPI based on the requirements stemming from each vertical use case. The methodology will also define 
how the interaction with the vertical end-users will be achieved taking into consideration the specifics of task T1.1. 
For the business validation will use the lean start -up methodology that centres around the main motivations of a 
business. The inputs will include apart from the business case itself, end -user feedback from the ir direct  
engagement in the field trials  of the vertic al use cases . The corresponding outputs will be validations that will 
allow to identify those use cases that have the highest commercialisation potential so as  to progress to the next 
step of creating a service product portfolio. For this purpose, we will use a set of  questionnaires, surveys and 
focused group workshops directly engaging also the customers of the vertical consortium partners. A detailed set 
of metric parameters considered for the business validation of each UC will be developed, such as those listed in 
Table 1.7a, which will be interrogated and quantified as part of the business validation process with the end-users.  
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  72  
Role of main partners: LMI will lead WP1, overseeing also the analysis of the challenges for 5G multi, concurrent 
and cross-domain orchestration and management,  supported primarily by  FNET for the definition and detailed 
analysis of the requirements, by TIM for leveraging and extending previous and ongoing work from 5G -PPP 
projects, as well as by WIT and TNOR for the development of the methodologies.   
 
Justification of resources: LMI will assign 0.5 full-time equivalent (FTE) person resources in tasks 1.1 and 1.2 
over a two-year period (i.e. 6PM/year), supported by  FNET (0.3 FTE person in tasks 1.1 & 1.4 
@4PM/person/year), TIM (0.3 FTE person in task 1.3 @4PM/year), WIT & TNOR (0.3-0.4 FTE person for 4-
5PM/year). 
 
Deliverables 
D1.1A, D1.1B: Definition and analysis of use cases/scenarios and corresponding KPIs based on LLs v1.0 & 
v2.0 (FNET) [M5, M26]: Interim (v1.0) and final version (v2.0) of reports containing the detailed analysis of the 
use cases, the conditions, requirements and the targ et KPIs that would set the benchmarking for the actual 
measurements in the Living Labs. 
D1.2A, D1.2B: Cross-domain orchestration and management challenges analysis  v1.0 & v2.0 (LMI) [M5, 
M26]: Interim (v1.0) and final version (v2.0) of reports defining the management of the life cycle of the services 
running across different 5G mobile networks including solutions for slicing and virtualisation beyond MANO. 
D1.3A, D1.3B: Leveraging and extending 5G -PPP previous work in 5G -SOLUTIONS v1.0 & v2.0  (TIM) 
[M5, M25]: Interim (v1.0) and final version ( v2.0) of r eports containing the outputs, results and assets from 
previous 5G-PPP related projects that will be utilised and extended in 5G-SOLUTIONS’s ecosystem. 
D1.4A, D1.4B: Methodologies for the technological/business validation of 5G and for LL measurements  
(WIT) [M 6, M25]: Interim (v1.0) and final version (v2.0) of r eports defining the methodologies for the 
technological and business validation of 5G connectivity and associated management within and across verticals. 
They also include the definition of test reports format and benchmarking for the validation of the KPIs. 
  
WP # WP2 Lead beneficiary:   NOKIA Start 
month 
 2 End month  34 
WP title 5G Infrastructure setup and operational readiness 
Participant# 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 
Short name 
of 
participant 
TIM 
NOKIA 
APPART 
A2T 
CTTC 
CEL 
EBOS 
FNET 
ENEL 
GLAN 
IBM 
ILS 
IRT 
IREN 
IRIS 
LIVEU 
LMI 
NTNU 
NURO 
OMES 
UOP 
PGBS 
PIIU 
TLNR 
WIT 
YARA 
PM per 
participant 27 33 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 0 0 0 24 0 0 7 0 0 
 
Objectives  
• To interface with and setup the 5G -EVE Turin and 5G -VINNI Norway and Patra facilities, including their 
support and upgrade for 1 year after the completion of these ICT-17 projects. 
• To install and setup minimum infrastructural extensions (e.g. remote or private 5G RAN nodes) for facilitating 
the localisation of use cases in remote site locations (Ireland, Brussels and Norway). 
• To design and develop the necessary plugins in an existing Cross-Domain Service Orchestrator ( CDSO - 
NOKIA’s Cloudband Network Director), so as to act as an umbrella orchestrator to enable automatic, unified, 
concurrent service provisioning, management and cross-domain orchestration across the ICT-17 facilities. 
• To enhance and extend the CDSO capabilities by exploring zero-touch automation mechanisms. 
 
Description of work  
Task 2.1 - Interfacing and setup of ICT -17-2018 5G E2E facilities to enable LL operation (TIM, NOKIA, 
A2T, UOP, TNOR) 
This task entails the interfacing of the 5G-EVE Turin, 5G-VINNI Norway and 5G-VINNI Patra ICT-17 facilities 
with the Cross-Domain Service Orchestrator (CDSO) including configuration and setup in order to ensure the end-
to-end readiness of the 5G infrastructure and measurement portals for the field trials . This task also includes the 
installation and the configuration of 3 remote 5G RAN stations by UOP, i.e. 2 in Ireland (one in IBM campus and 
the other in GLAN factory) plus another 5G RAN station in PBGS factory in Brussels. Localisation is necessary 
in order to perform real measurements and validate the performance capabilities of 5G especially for the Factories 
of the Future use cases , which required ultra-low latencies and high reliability. Two more 5G remote nodes will 
also be installed and setup by TNOR in Norway in order to enable the validation of the measurements for Industry 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  73  
4.0, Smart Cities and Smart Ports use cases. For the procurement of these 5 additional 5G RAN nodes, budget has 
been allocated to both TNOR and UOP (see ‘other direct costs’ in Section 3.4 ). Furthermore, the intention of 
TNOR is to enable 2 additional 5G RAN nodes for free in locations in Trondheim, Norway, to strengthen the 
Smart City IoT -based use cases . All remote nodes will be incrementally upgraded (3 times) to the latest 3GPP 
releases as per ICT-17 upgrade roadmap. Additional effort has been assigned to this task  for TIM and UOP and 
additional budget for TNOR under “other direct costs” for purchasing support services by their facility vendor, in 
order to continue the support and upgrading of their ICT-17 facilities to the latest available release, one year after 
the completion of the 5G-EVE and 5G-VINNI projects. This is important to ensure that by the completion of 5G-
SOLUTIONS all vertical services will be validated according to the latest 3GPP release, so as to enable with 
utmost confidence the adoption of the 5G technology and associated vertical services by the market. 
 
Task 2.2 – Cross-Domain Service Orchestrator (CDSO) plugins design & development for cross -domain 
orchestration (NOKIA) 
This task is responsible for identifying and implementing the necessary interface adjustments needed (implemented 
via plugins) at the CDSO to enable the end-to-end orchestration of the various services across different and diverse 
ICT-17 facilities. The CDSO implements generic interfaces with a plugin mechanism to include the required 
adjustments. This task includes the following activities: 
Deployment analysis [NOKIA]: Define where the CDSO will be deployed, identify the cloud resources on which 
it will be deployed and identify the required network resources. 
CDSO requirement analysis [NOKIA]: Identify & map the required systems which the CDSO needs to hook to 
and their existing API implementations. Mapping should also include which API on the managed system maps to 
which plugin on the CDSO and what kind of adjustment is required. The deliverable includes a matrix for each 
system the CDSO is integrated with, in which the API's and plugins are mapped with required data manipulation 
to needed to be performed at the CDSO to enable the access and the orchestration of the services to be executed in 
the LLs across multiple ICT-17 facilities.  
CDSO APIs design [NOKIA]: Design the actual pug-in implementation at the CDSO to enable service provisioning 
and orchestration across different ICT -17 facilities. The deliverable includes details of the mapping needed for 
each API implementation at the plugin. 
Design of security measures  [NOKIA]: Identify security risks and specify the actions needed to apply security 
measures to protect the CDSO from external cyber threats. 
Plan for dry-run acceptance testing [NOKIA]: Prepare an acceptance testing plan specifying how the CDSO will 
be tested and the dry-run tests that need to be performed at infrastructure level so as to ensure its readiness for the 
Living Lab field trials. This may require specification of a simulated/m ock environment, so this dry -run can be 
executed prior to the LL operation. 
 
Task 2.3 - Integration of CDSO plugins with the 5G ICT-17 facilities (NOKIA)  
Implementation, integration, deployment and testing of the CDSO plugin for cross ICT -17 facility service 
orchestration. It includes for each controlled system, hooking of the actual API's, testing that the implementation 
was done correctly, and that the system is functional end-to-end. It includes the following activities: 
CDSO installation and plugin implementation [NOKIA]:  Implement the necessary plugins so as to enable service 
orchestration. Install NOKIA’s Cloudband CBND in a cloud-based environment. 
Cross-domain service orchestration across the ICT-17 facilities [NOKIA]:  For each vertical application that needs 
to be onboarded to the CDSO, create the VNF Descriptors and all other required scripts and descriptors to allow 
automatic service orchestration and provisioning. This also includes packaging the required images in the 
supported format and implementing the required deployment actions (scripts) per vertical. 
Deployment and functionality testing  [NOKIA]: Perform dry run testing to verify that the vertical services are 
properly deployed and that service components function properly. The CDSO integrates with the vertical 
application manager via an API which is called from a plugin implemented and executed by NOKIA’s Cloudband 
CBND NFVO platform. This API includes "must" entries and "optional" entries which have default code in case 
they are not implemented. Dry run testing includes verification that all "must" API en tries are properly 
implemented, the code calling them is properly loaded into the NFVO and legal values are returned from the APIs 
according to the Plugin specification. Failure to implement any "must" API or failure to return a valid value, will 
result in a failure of this test. At a later stage, when the integration of the CDSO comes to a "wet" stage (i.e. actual 
integration with the real environment and vertical services that need to be executed), this implementation will be 
tested in the LLs, where not only the API calls will be tested but also the workflow logic. 
Living Labs integration support [NOKIA]: This task is intended to resolve integration issues when the LL are 
actually working in production. There’s a n eed to allocate resources for this task since after implementing the 
plugins and executing dry run testing, there may still be issues that may only be encountered when running the full 
verticals and performing the KPI testing. 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  74  
Task 2.4 - Zero-touch automation mechanisms for 5G service lifecycle (LMI, NOKIA) 
Within the context of programs , such as ETSI Zero -touch Network and Service Management program or MEF 
Lifecycle Services Orchestration, there has been much industry discussion on automation and lifecycle concerns. 
Zero-touch automation mechanisms are inherently linked to the increase of  speed and removal of human 
interaction throughout the lifecycle of the processes, with a focus on pro-active management. In this task, we will 
examine the complex problem of managing services and machine learning features in deployed operations.  
Analysis of emerging Machine Learning lifecycle programs  [LMI]: We will investigate initiatives on Machine 
Learning lifecycle programs, with a key focus on the viability of a DevOps environment that encompasses machine 
learning models in production systems. 
Enablement or automation via Machine Learning [LMI]:  In this subtask, we will explore novel vertical industry 
automations, based on adaptive automation of 5G features combined with predictive analyses of data coming from 
the vertical industry service. We will also explore network application tracking to support the next generation of 
root case analysis features. By this we extend the core value of automation and accountability to be fundamental 
parts of dependable automation. 
 
Role of main partners: NOKIA will lead WP2, overseeing also the design, development and integration of plugins 
at the CDSO with the ICT-17 facilities, supported primarily by TIM, TNOR and UOP for the installation and setup 
of their ICT -17 facilities, as well as by  LMI for the zero -touch automation mechanisms to enable 5G service 
lifecycle management.   
 
Justification of resources: NOKIA will assign 1.4 FTE person resources in tasks 2.2 and 2.3  over a two -year 
period (i.e. 16PM/year), supported by TIM (0.8 FTE person in task T2.1 @10PM/year for 33 months) and TNOR 
(0.25 FTE person in task 2.1 @3PM/year for 33 months), UOP (0.75 FTE person in task 2.1 @9PM/year for 33 
months) and LMI (0.4 FTE person in task 2.4 @5PM/year for 2 years). 
 
Deliverables 
D2.1 Setup and operation of 5G infrastructure (TIM) [M34]: Installation and technical diagrams outlining the 
configuration of the ICT-17 5G-EVE Turin and 5G-VINNI Norway and Patra facilities. 
D2.2A - D2.2D: Specifications and design of CDSO plugins (NOKIA) [M4, M12, M18, M28]: Interim (v1.0, 
v2.0 & v3.0) and final version (v4.0) of reports defining the technical specifications and the low-level design to 
enable the implementation of the necessary plugins at CDSO. 
D2.3A, D2.3B: Zero touch automation mechanisms for 5G service lifecycle (LMI) [M8, M25]: Initial (v1.0) 
and final (v2.0) versions of  reports containing the proposed zero -touch automation methods for 5G service 
lifecycle management to be validated in the project. 
 
WP # WP3 Lead beneficiary:   APPART Start month  3 End month  34 
WP title Technological enablers for Living Labs 
Participant# 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 
Short name 
of 
participant 
TIM 
NOKIA 
APPART 
A2T 
CTTC 
CEL 
EBOS 
FNET 
ENEL 
GLAN 
IBM 
ILS 
IRT 
IREN 
IRIS 
LIVEU 
LMI 
NTNU 
NURO 
OMES 
UOP 
PGBS 
PIIU 
TLNR 
WIT 
YARA 
PM per 
participant 3 0 51 4 0 0 39 0 0 0 10 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 2 0 0 2 17 0 
 
Objectives  
• To design, develop and deploy the technological enablers , i.e. the KPI visualisation system and APIs  for 
facilitating the execution of the field trials. 
 
Description of work  
Task 3.1 - KPI visualisation system specifications and design (APPART, EBOS, IBM, LMI, WIT) 
This task will focus on capturing and documenting the functionality requirements of the KPI visualisation system 
and translating them into detailed technical specifications, which will be used to develop the low -level design of 
the system. A  mapping of the  descriptive list of all the use cases regarding the system functionality  and 
requirements with the respective Unified Modelling Language diagrams will be provided. The definitions of the 
roles available in the system along side with the access rights of ea ch role will be decided in this task. Finally, a 
high-level analysis of the technical architecture of the system along with the technologies util ised will also be 
provided. The deliverable will be used as input for task 3.2 to enable the development of the system. 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  75  
Task 3.2 - KPI visualisation system components development, real-time collection and analysis of data feeds, 
and privacy aspects (APPART, EBOS, IBM, LMI) 
Based on the detailed low-level design provided in deliverable D3.1, this task will focus on the development of all 
software components comprising the KPI visuali sation system. This involves the functionality  from the data 
collectors, the data parsers, the KPI calculations  based on the developed deep learning algorithms and machine 
learning optimisation to enable real -time graph data presentation, and the web-based graphical front -end 
visualisation environment for each of the metric parameters to be validated per  use case  scenario. The data 
collected from disparate feeds through the ICT-17 measurement portals will be analysed using cognitive machine 
learning techniques, including  open and linked data, ad -hoc data querying, filtering and retrieval, supporting 
SQL/MongoDB type of querying and or graphical queries, creation  of data displays, master data management 
support, metadata integration, access and retrieval. Define entities for specific KPIs to drive optimisation against 
reference values. Define computational components and algorithms, selecting, configuring and extending existing 
libraries in R and Python. Special care will be given to the security measures applied for data protection along with 
all privacy aspects that need to be taken care of such as data anonymi sation, data encryption, storage of sensitive 
data, etc. Produce the KPI visualisation system  technical documentation containing detailed guides to allow 
successful service delivery, indicating necessary physical requirements, minimum hardware, software and 
guidelines of use from both, tool and technical ser vice interface, where the consortium will pay special attention 
to create substantial and clear documentation to allow end-users from LLs to make use of the system. 
 
Task 3.3 - APIs and interfaces design & development (EBOS, APPART, A2T, IBM, WIT) 
The aim of this task is to define and design the following APIs which will be developed based on open standards:  
▪ Measurement portal intent-based REST API (see API C in Figure 1.1) to enable the interfacing with the online 
measurement platforms of ICT-17 facilities. REST APIs enable software developers to define API calls with 
a high granularity, which simplifies the logic required to provision complex services, thus providing  
interoperability between online software systems. By using stateless protocol s, such as HTTP/HTTPS and 
standard operations, REST APIs have fast performance, reliability, and the ability to scale, by re -using 
components that can be managed and updated without affecting the system as a whole, even in its runtime 
mode. Such APIs will support only secure connections with authentication. 
▪ Application-related intent-based declarative API (see API D in Figure 1.1) to enable the interfacing of new 
services to the 5G interworking layer. This type of API will describe the desired system behaviour and will 
meet 3rd party developers’ demand for agile, economical end-to-end services and application delivery through 
5G, by delivering benefits including ease of use, automation of complex logic, portability, multi -vendor 
interoperability, scalability, etc. 
For these API types, a definition and technical specifications will be provided including their low-level design, all 
of which will be documented in deliverable D3.2A-D. Based on the design blueprints, the software development 
of the APIs will follow.  
 
Task 3.4 - Integration of KPI visualisation system with the ICT -17-2018 E2E facilities and dry -run 
interworking tests (APPART, TIM, EBOS, UOP, TNOR, WIT) 
The key objective of this task is to describe the procedure , to perform the integration of the KPI visualisation 
system with the measurement portals of the 5G-EVE Turin and 5G-VINNI Norway and Patra ICT-17 facilities, as 
well as to perform dry-run interworking tests to verify proper operation, functionality and communication between 
them prior to live deployment in Living Labs . The integration will be achieved through the intent -based APIs of 
the ICT-17 measurement portals and the measurement portal APIs developed in task T3.3. 
 
Task 3.5 - KPI visualisation system deployment as a Service in the cloud and LL driven improvements 
(EBOS, APPART, IBM, WIT) 
Create the necessary packages for container -based system deployment as a service in the cloud, to enable 
concurrency in use -case execution, to quickly match sp ecific LL configurations and to easily deploy the KPI 
visualisation system in the LLs, by focusing on the following aspects: micro-service-oriented architecture / micro-
services orchestration. Setup, configure and deploy the system in the LL pre -trials to ensure proper operation, 
concept verification and usability testing. Test procedures description and acceptance tests execution to verify 
proper functioning of all developed components  will also be provided . In this task, an evaluation of the 
performance capabilities of the KPI visualisation system will be conducted after every implementation cycle, based 
on the outcomes of deliverables D4. 3-D7.3 in order to perform potential incremental improvements  in the 
functionality and performance of the KPI visualisation system. 
 
Role of main partners: APPART will lead WP3, overseeing also the design, development and integration of the 
KPI visualisation system with the ICT -17 facilities, supported primarily by EBOS, WIT, IBM and LMI  and for 
the design and development of the APIs and for the deployment of the system as a web service in the cloud.   
 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  76  
Justification of resources: APPART will assign senior software developer resources equivalent to 1.6 full-time 
person in WP3 over a 2.5-year period (i.e. 19PM/year), supported by  EBOS (1.2 FTE person in WP3 
@15PM/year), WIT (0.6 FTE person @7PM/year), IBM and LMI (0.3 FTE person @4PM/year). 
 
Deliverables 
D3.1: KPI visualisation system specifications (APPART) [M6]: A report containing the detailed specifications 
for the KPI visualisation system. 
D3.1B, D3.1C: KPI visualisation system design (APPART) [M11, M17]: Interim (v1.0) and final version (v2.0) 
of reports containing the low-level design for the KPI visualisation system. 
D3.2A-D3.2D: KPI visualisation system and interfaces implementation and deployment (APPART) [M12, 
M18, M26, M33]: Implementation and deployment of the KPI visualisation system in the cloud (interim (v1.0, 
v2.0 & v3.0) and final (v4.0) versions) including external open -standards intent -based APIs to enable the ir 
interconnection with the ICT-17 measurement portals and the verticals. 
 
WP # WP4 Lead beneficiary:   IRIS Start month  11 End month  34 
WP title Industry 4.0 field trials 
Participant# 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 
Short name 
of 
participant 
TIM 
NOKIA 
APPART 
A2T 
CTTC 
CEL 
EBOS 
FNET 
ENEL 
GLAN 
IBM 
ILS 
IRT 
IREN 
IRIS 
LIVEU 
LMI 
NTNU 
NURO 
OMES 
UOP 
PGBS 
PIIU 
TNOR 
WIT 
YARA 
PM per 
participant 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 18 0 0 0 0 47 0 0 18 0 18 0 18 0 5 0 3 
 
Objectives  
• To setup the test environment and perform the relevant planning and LL operational management for Industry 
4.0 field trials. 
• To conduct advanced field trials in the vertical sector of Factories of the Future to  validate the technological 
and business performance of use cases over 5G.  
• To use the test results and data, to deliver impact analysis and impact assessment reports to systematically 
address the LL stakeholder perspectives. 
 
Description of work  
Task 4.1 - LL planning, setup & operational management (IRIS, GLAN, NTNU, OMES, PBGS, TNOR) 
This is the management and monitoring task whose objective is to provide the test -bench to the stakeholders, so 
as to be able to demonstrate through actual field trials that the underlying 5G ICT -17 facilities are capable of 
supporting the stringent KPI requirements needed for the successful delivery of innovative vertical services that 
require 5G performance capabilities. The process in developing the LLs and their use cases, will be agile, so that 
a constant interaction cycle of progress will be delivering the results incrementally as services. To this end, the 
LLs will be following the Deming Plan – Do – Check – Act cycle. There will be a constant interplay between the 
LLs’ progress and the research developments. Provide the overall planning as well as the setup activities for the 
deployment and testing of the use cases  in this Living Lab (LL) . Prepare the evaluation of the LL, including 
indications on the baseline conditions (in  terms of criteria for defining the sample), relevant assumptions to be 
considered (if any), workflow, checklists and templates, reference/target KPIs to be met/benchmarked according 
to deliverable D1.1, and key roles and interactions within this process. Particular attention will be dedicated to the 
planning phase by defining a Gantt chart of the expected tests, analysis and feedbacks loops before the final 
delivery of the evidences form the LLs. Once this procedure will be structured, and before actually implementing 
it, it will be presented to and validated with all relevant partners in order to check its feasibility and maximize its 
efficiency. 
This task includes also the monitoring phase, which will allow the project staff to take stock of relevant data, define 
datasets for impact analysis, process collect measurements, and organize outcomes into actionable information. 
The results generated will be compared to the reference target KPIs to assess the performance of the 5G network, 
provide feedback for refinements and, eventually, final recommendations, which will be fed to the evaluation and 
lessons learned tasks. The leader of this task will also monitor the implementation progress of the execution of the 
use cases, in coordination with the LL leaders and the WP1, WP2 and WP3 leaders to guarantee the compliance 
with the project objectives.  
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  77  
Task 4.2 - LL1 execution: Factories of the Future (IRIS, GLAN, NTNU, OMES, PBGS, TNOR, YARA) 
The focus of LL1 is to organise and perform a set of use cases, outlined in Section 1.3.4 through an agile-based 
iterative process. The LL1 vertical will validate KPIs from representative use cases, which have been identified by 
the 5G-PPP community and the 5G -SOLUTIONS consortium vertical partners as important for the stakeholders 
of the Factories of the Future industry. The use cases will be performed within the factory facilities of our process 
industry participants (PGBS in Belgium and  GLAN in Ireland) using new portable 5G nodes having integrated 
core and RAN functionality, which will be installed within the factories by UOP and serve as standalone private 
5G networks. An additional 5G node will be installed in Norway to enable the execution of UC1.5. This is critical 
to enable the execution of realistic scenarios capturing and measuring the stringent requirements related to  real-
time latency. Also, the interfaces between transceivers and sensors for wireless communication within the factories 
will be developed. The execution of all Living Labs including this one will be performed over 3 iterative cycles, 
each spanning over a period of 6 months to ensure appropriate tes ting and validation is conducted in a 
comprehensive manner per 3GPP release. In this respect, great attention has been provided to align the validation 
of the use cases with the corresponding upgrades of the ICT -17 5G-VINNI Norway and the portable private 5G 
nodes facilities brought by UOP (part of 5G-VINNI consortium). Specifically, field trials will be conducted over 
3GPP Rel. 15, Rel. 16 and also Rel.17 in case the latter release would be made available by Q3 2021. 
 
Task 4.3 - Performance evaluation and lessons learned (IRIS, GLAN, IREN, NTNU, OMES, PBGS, TNOR, 
YARA) The purpose of this task can be briefly described from the following three aspects. First of all, the 
performance of each use case will be evaluated, particularly from the KPI perspective to illustrate how current 5G 
capabilities can be leveraged for different applications in each use case. Secondly, according to the results received 
from each use case in every agile-based iteration, provide requirements and sugge stions to further improve both 
functional and non-functional capabilities of 5G facilities. Following that, each use case will be further evaluated 
to reflect the latest improvement of the 5G infrastructure from the application perspective.  This task will also 
provide and establish systematic feedback loops to WP1-WP3, for continuous refinement. Results will be analysed 
both quantitively and quantifiably. Conclusions and recommendations will be drawn including recommendations 
for further trial validations. When possible, the impact of 5G deployment will be also analysed so to potentially 
allow operators to evaluate their 5G network deployment scope, pattern and duration. Throughout the validation 
testing period, knowledge and findings will be documented in deliverable D4.3 together with evaluation reporting 
and impact assessment for the LL, and extracting lessons learned for internal dissemination among the consortium, 
capacity building and external dissemination as appropriate. 
 
Role of main partners: IRIS will lead WP 4, overseeing the validation of the use cases in the Factories of the 
Future vertical, as well as the evaluation and lessons learned, supported by the industrial FoF partners.   
 
Justification of resources:  IRIS will assign resources equivalent to 2 full-time persons in WP4 over a 2 -year 
period (i.e. 1 2PM/person/year), supported primarily by GLAN, NTNU, OMES, PBGS (0.6 FTE person 
@7PM/year). 
 
Deliverables  
D4.1-7.1A, D4.1-7.1B: LL planning, setup, operational management handbook (IRIS) [M13, M30] 
The deliverables (initial and final versions)  contain the implementation and testing plan for the operation  of all 
Living Labs, updated at the end of each iterative testing cycle period, providing reporting on progress made. 
 
D4.2-7.2A - D4.2-D7.2C: LL field trials (IRIS [D4.2], IBM [D5.2], LIVEU [D6.2], TNOR [D7.2]) [M19, M27, 
M34] Actual field trials of all Living Labs, repeated over 3 iterative testing cycles, one per 3GPP release.  
 
D4.3-7.3A – D4.3-7.3C: LL performance evaluation and lessons learned (IRIS [D4.3], IBM [D5.3], LIVEU 
[D6.3], TNOR [D7.3]) [M19, M27, M34]. Initial (v1.0), interim (v2.0) and final (v3.0) reports per testing cycle, 
containing a critical evaluation and findings from the LLs, lessons learned, the degree the KPIs have been met and 
suggestions for improvements. 
 
WP # WP5 Lead beneficiary:   IBM Start month  11 End month  34 
WP title Smart urban environment field trials 
Participant# 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 
Short name 
of 
participant 
TIM 
NOKIA 
APPART 
A2T 
CTTC 
CEL 
EBOS 
FNET 
ENEL 
GLAN 
IBM 
ILS 
IRT 
IREN 
IRIS 
LIVEU 
LMI 
NTNU 
NURO 
OMES 
UOP 
PGBS 
PIIU 
TNOR 
WIT 
YARA 
PM per 
participant 0 0 0 36 0 0 0 0 30 0 39 0 0 22 0 0 0 4 28 0 0 0 0 6 0 15 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  78  
 
Objectives  
• To setup the test environment and perform the relevant planning and LL operational management for the Smart 
Urban Environment cluster. 
• To design and implement the Living Lab specific software and hardware upgrades needed to execute the Smart 
Energy, Smart Cities and Smart Ports use cases enabled by 5G communication technology. 
• To conduct advanced field trials in the vertical sectors of Smart Energy, S mart Cities and Smart Port s to 
validate the technological and business performance of use cases over 5G.  
• To use the test results and data, to deliver impact analysis and impact assessment reports to systematically 
address the LL stakeholder perspectives. 
 
Description of work  
Task 5.1 - LL planning, setup, operational management and evaluation ( A2T, ENEL, IBM, IREN, NURO, 
TNOR, YARA): Similar to task T4.1. 
 
Task 5.2 - LL2 execution: Smart Energy (A2T, ENEL, IREN) 
The activities envisioned in this task are similar to those in task T4.2, but adjusted to reflect the specificities of the 
Smart Energy Living Lab. At first, an in -depth analysis of the use cases and the related functional requirements 
proposed in WP1 will  be performed, with the aim of identifying the needed LL -specific control functionalities, 
establish a reference control architecture and define use case specific sequence diagrams. Following that, two 
parallel activities will be performed: (i) the control  algorithms enabling the execution of the use cases will be 
designed and preliminary tested in a simulation environment; (ii) the technical specifications characteri sing the 
communication interfaces among LL-specific control architecture components will be defined. Based on that, new 
software modules characteri sing the technical solution will be implemented and all hardware installations and 
upgrades needed to execute the demonstration will be performed. Then the demonstration activities will be 
undertaken, according to the test cases and the related planning established in Task 5.1. The use cases will be 
demonstrated in the 5G-EVE Turin ICT-17 facility, relying on ENEL, IREN and TIM equipment . This task also 
covers the fusing of the dedicated Energy equipment to be used with the 5G-EVE Turin facility to ensure proper 
communication operation. A2T will engage a linked 3rd party (CRAT, as explained in Section 4) to partly support 
them in the project. Specifically, CRAT will provide contributions in the design and simulation of extended control 
strategies for active demand and electric vehicles smart charging.  In addition, ENEL will subcontract part of its 
work (~20%) that cannot be fully undertaken by ENEL (e.g. statistical analysis in data analysis/post-processing). 
 
Task 5.3 - LL3 execution: Smart Cities & Ports (IBM, NURO, TNOR, YARA) 
The main objective of this task is to plan, design and conduct a set of six use cases as outlined in Section 1.3.4.1 
by using an agile -based iterative process. The Smart Cities & Ports  vertical will validate KPIs from the six use 
cases of interest, which h ave been identified by the 5G -PPP community and the 5G -SOLUTIONS partners as 
important for the stakeholders of the Smart Cities & Ports industry. In particular, the initial iterations will allow 
the stakeholders to perform an initial validation of the KPIs, and the subsequent ones will perform a more critical 
validation and to draw up recommendations, that will be documented and disseminated. The field trials for all use 
cases apart from UC3.4  will be conducted in 5G -VINNI Norway. UC3.4 will be conducted in  IBM technology 
campus in Dublin through a localised RAN station, encompassing gNB and MEC functionalities, provided , 
installed and configured onsite by partner UOP. This node will be interconnected with the 5G -VINNI Patra core 
facility via the GEANT network. All use cases will be performed in a complementary and mutually supportive 
manner to optimally use all the available capabilities and expertise to ensure technical and operational excellence 
for all partners. The performance of each use case will be measured in detail and benchmarked according to the 
pre-defined target KPIs.  
 
Task 5.4 - Performance evaluation and lessons learned (IBM, A2T, ENEL, IREN, NTNU, NURO, TNOR, 
YARA): Similar to task T4.4. 
 
Role of main partners: IBM will lead WP5, overseeing the validation of the use cases in the Smart Energy, Smart 
Cities and Smart Ports verticals, as well as the evaluation and lessons learned, supported primarily by A2T for the 
planning and operational management of the Living Lab and the vertical partners (ENEL, NURO, IREN, YARA).   
 
Justification of resources: IBM will assign resources equivalent to 1.7 full-time persons in WP5 over a 2-year 
period (i.e. 20PM/year), supported by  A2T (1.5 FTE person @18PM/year), ENEL (1.25  FTE person 
@15PM/year), NURO (1.2 FTE person @14PM/year), IREN (0.9 FTE person @11PM/year) and YARA (0.6 FTE 
person @7.5PM/year). 
 
Deliverables  
Consolidated in D4.1-7.1A to D4.1-7.1B, D4.2-7.2A to D4.2-7.2C, D4.3-7.3A to D4.3-7.3C deliverables. 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  79  
 
WP # WP6 Lead beneficiary:   LIVEU Start month  11 End month  34 
WP title Enhanced User Experience field trials 
Participant# 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 
Short name 
of 
participant 
TIM 
NOKIA 
APPART 
A2T 
CTTC 
CEL 
EBOS 
FNET 
ENEL 
GLAN 
IBM 
ILS 
IRT 
IREN 
IRIS 
LIVEU 
LMI 
NTNU 
NURO 
MES 
UOP 
PGBS 
PIIU 
TNOR 
WIT 
YARA 
PM per 
participant 0 0 0 0 12 0 0 24 0 0 0 0 20 0 0 27 0 0 6 0 15 0 0 3 0 0 
 
Objectives  
• To setup the test environment and perform the relevant planning and LL operational management  for the 
enhanced user experience field trials. 
• To conduct advanced field trials in the vertical sectors of Media and Entertainment to validate the technological 
and business performance of the use cases over 5G.  
• To use the test results and data, to deliver impact analysis and impact assessment reports to systematically 
address the LL stakeholder perspectives. 
 
Description of work 
Task 6.1 - LL planning, setup, operational management and evaluation (LIVEU, CTTC, FNET, IRT, NURO, 
UOP): Similar to task T4.1. 
 
Task 6.2 -LL4 execution: Media & Entertainment (M&E) (LIVEU, CTTC, FNET, IRT, NURO, UOP, TNOR): 
The main objective of this task is to plan, design and conduct a set of four use cases as outlined in Section 1.3 .4 
by using an agile-based iterative process. The Media & Entertainment vertical will validate KPIs from a set of six 
use cases of interest, which have been identified by the 5G-PPP community and the 5G-SOLUTIONS partners as 
important for the stakeholders of the M&E industry. In particular, the initial iterations will allow the stakeholders 
to perform an initial validation of the KPIs, and the subsequent ones will perform a more critical validation and to 
draw up recommendations, that will be documented and disseminated. The field trials for the use cases will be 
executed in 5G-VINNI Patra facility. UC4.3 will also be executed in parallel in 5G-VINNI Norway facility also 
validating the use case over cross-domain environment, i.e. between different networks and vendors. All use cases 
will be performed in a complementary and mutually supportive manner to optimally use all the available 
capabilities and expertise to ensure technical and operational excellence for all partners. The performance of each 
use case will be measured and benchmarked according to the pre-defined target KPIs.  
 
Task 6.3 - Performance evaluation and lessons learned (FNET, CTTC, LIVEU, UOP, TNOR): Similar to task 
T4.4.  
 
Role of main partners: LIVEU will lead WP 6, overseeing the validation of the use cases in the Media & 
Entertainment vertical, as well as for the planning and operational management, of the Living Lab, supported 
primarily by FNET for the evaluation and lessons learned.   
 
Justification of resources: LIVEU will assign resources equivalent to 1.1 full-time persons in WP6 over a 2-year 
period (i.e. 13PM/year), supported primarily by FNET (1 FTE person @12PM/year), IRT (0.8 FTE person 
@10PM/year), UOP (0.6 FTE person @7.5PM/year) and CTTC (0.5 FTE person @6PM/year). 
 
Deliverables 
Consolidated in D4.1-7.1A to D4.1-7.1B, D4.2-7.2A to D4.2-7.2C, D4.3-7.3A to D4.3-7.3C deliverables. 
 
WP # WP7 Lead beneficiary:   TNOR Start month  12 End month  34 
WP title Multi-vertical concurrent validation field trials 
Participant# 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 
Short name 
of 
participant 
TIM 
NOKIA 
APPART 
A2T 
CTTC 
CEL 
EBOS 
FNET 
ENEL 
GLAN 
IBM 
ILS 
IRT 
IREN 
IRIS 
LIVEU 
LMI 
NTNU 
NURO 
OMES 
UOP 
PGBS 
PIIU 
TNOR 
WIT 
YARA 
PM per 
participant 6 3 3 3 3 3 3 5 5 5 5 3 5 5 9 5 2 4 3 5 3 5 5 9 3 5 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  80  
Objectives  
• To setup the test environment and perform the relevant planning and LL operational management for the multi-
vertical concurrent services usage Multi Living Lab. 
• To conduct advanced field trials in a combined, parallel and concurrent manner of those use cases from LL1-
LL4 whose target KPI requirements fall under eMBB, mMTC and/or URLLC classes of s ervice, to validate 
the technological and business performance of 5G and to prove that no performance degradation occurs.  
• To use the test results and data, to deliver impact analysis and impact assessment reports to systematically 
address the LL stakeholder perspectives. 
 
Description of work 
Task 7.1 - LL planning, setup, operational management and evaluation (TNOR, TIM, IBM, IRIS, IREN, 
LIVEU): Similar to task T4.1. 
 
Task 7.2 – MLL execution: Concurrent validation of eMBB, mMTC & URLLC service classes from LL1-
LL4 (IRIS, all)  
The main objective of this task is to conduct  concurrently field trials from a combination of UCs from LL1 -LL4 
as illustrated in Table 1.6, which  are grouped over the separate classes of ITU requirements, i.e. eMBB, mMTC 
and URLLC. The purpose is  to demonstrate and capture evidence through the relevant performance KPIs that 
slicing and virtualisation are (i) capable of successfully managing multi-domain resources, (ii) are in line with such 
concurrent performance requirements and (iii) that there is no interference between vertical use cases in the 
presence of concurrent usage of resources. The use cases will be executed in the same ICT-17 facilities as in LL1-
LL4. The performance of each use case will be measured in detail and benchmarked according to the pre-defined 
target KPIs.  
 
Task 7.3 - Performance evaluation and lessons learned (TNOR, all): Similar to task T4.4.  
 
Role of main partners: TNOR will lead WP7, overseeing the planning and operational management of the MLL, 
as well as the evaluation and lessons learned, supported primarily by IRIS for the validation of the concurrent use 
cases in all verticals. 
 
Justification of resources: TNOR and IRIS will assign resources equivalent to 0.4 full-time persons in WP7 over 
a 2-year period (i.e. 4.5PM/year), supported by all consortium members with an effort of 1-3PM/year each to have 
a collective understanding of the findings. 
 
Deliverables 
Consolidated in D4.1-7.1A to D4.1-7.1B, D4.2-7.2A to D4.2-7.2C, D4.3-7.3A to D4.3-7.3C deliverables. 
 
WP # WP8 Lead beneficiary:   ILS Start month  1 End month  33 
WP title Commercialisation activities, IP management and international networking 
Participant# 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 
Short name 
of 
participant 
TIM 
NOKIA 
APPART 
A2T 
CTTC 
CEL 
EBOS 
FNET 
ENEL 
GLAN 
IBM 
ILS 
IRT 
IREN 
IRIS 
LIVEU 
LMI 
NTNU 
NURO 
OMES 
UOP 
PGBS 
PIIU 
TNOR 
WIT 
YARA 
PM per 
participant 10 4 3 6 3 8 5 0 3 0 5 32 8 2 7 6 6 0 12 0 2 0 3 6 5 0 
 
Objectives  
• To assess market opportunities, to monitor the technological landscape and to develop viable business plans 
for targeted cluster groups of applications that can be delivered to the market as a commercial service. 
• To make impactful contributions towards standardisation bodies. 
• To identify and manage innovation from the project , to develop the Data Management Plan and to develop 
and implement the Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) strategy. 
 
Description of work 
Task 8.1 - Market assessment and technology monitoring (NURO, TIM, NOKIA, A2T, CEL, EBOS, ENEL, 
IBM, ILS, IREN, IRIS, LIVEU, LMI) 
All involved members will perform a continuous market and research watch in order to identify and verify that the 
use cases to be trialled are indeed the most relevant having the highest commercialisation interest and potential 
amongst the targeted vertica l industries. This task will undertake a market survey assessment to understand the 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  81  
sectoral needs and opportunities for 5G -SOLUTIONS, with an initial focus on telecoms and SMEs. The market 
analysis will include a SWOT analysis, trend analysis and, where a ppropriate, develop tactical and strategic 
responses, informing its commercialisation plan in task T8.2. It will also seek to understand well how 5G -
SOLUTIONS compares and contrasts to other solutions being developed within the market, to define a market 
position and unique value propositions for the solution.   
 
Task 8.2 - Business, marketing plan and sustainability (ILS, A2T, CEL, ENEL, IBM, IREN, IRIS, LIVEU, 
NURO, TNOR) 
This task has two strands. The first strand will deliver a comprehensive business focused (as opposed to 
technology) assessment of the most immediate and realistic market opportunities for 5G vertical applications. The 
detailed market assessment conducted in task T8.1 combined with the evaluation and lessons learn ed from the 
Living Labs will identify those use cases that have the highest commercialisation potential. Based on the output 
of the first strand, the 5G-SOLUTIONS use cases will be consolidated into 3 targeted cluster groups of applications 
(i.e. Industry 4.0, Smart urban environment and Enhanced user experience) that can be delivered to the market as 
bundled commercial services. Each commercial service will have a lead commercialisation partner who will own 
the execution of the business development plan that is created within 5G -SOLUTIONS.  The commercialisation 
owners are A2T for the Smart Energy, IBM for the Smart Cities & Smart Ports, IRIS for Factories of the Future 
and LIVEU for Media & Entertainment. ILS will provide the industry and commercial knowle dge to lead the 
commercialisation partners in creating viable business plan s for each of the targeted areas that identifies the 
specific market opportunity, the financial model, operational model and initial go-to-market steps. Business model 
analysis will be performed and enable recommendations on the preferred business structure. 
 
Task 8.3 Standardisation (IRT, TIM, NOKIA, CTTC, NURO, TNOR, WIT)  
5G-SOLUTIONS will use standardi sation as a means to exploit the impacts of the project result and to most 
efficiently invest the public funding of this project. It will go about this in two ways: Firstly, it will ensure that the 
research results produced by the project will be aligned wi th existing and emerging standards from the relevant 
standardisation bodies (e.g. 3GPP, ETSI, ITU, IEEE, IETF, etc ). Secondly, through 5G-PPP pre-standardisation 
Working Group and contributing to the 2nd phase of 5G standardisation efforts, 5G-SOLUTIONS will analyse the 
standardisation gaps with respect to the 5G-PPP vision so that such gaps can be adequately addressed. In particular, 
the consortium will provide feedback to the standardisation process by providing experiences, lessons learned, and 
research results, relevant to the overall 5G architecture, network softwarisation and slicing, network management, 
use cases and key requirements , as indicatively listed in Table 2.9 in Section 2.2.2. The following planning 
activities are foreseen: 
• A dedicated standardisation action plan, identifying relevant standardisation and regulatory bodies.  
• A roadmap of relevant standardisation and regulatory bodies (3GPP, ETSI, ITU, IEEE, IETF, etc.) and topics 
for 5G, including evaluating existing roadmaps at international  level; influencing pre-standardisation on 5G 
and related R&D, recommending which outcomes should be standard ised; joint actions with international 
fora, such as, ONF, GSMA, TMN, Broadband Forum, NGMN, OneM2M, etc. 
• Setting up the standardi sation activity roadmap by M8 and continue the updating of this roadmap based on 
the project’s work progress and in conjunction with the SDOs progress. 
• Coordinating the project and standardi sation groups through constant monitoring of activities and regular 
conference calls with standardisation experts.  
• Seizing opportunities to push technology contributions into ongoing specifications. 
• Coordinating with standardisation experts to draft contributions ahead of standard meetings. 
• Continuously promoting the project at standardisation-related workshops, panels, and summits.  
• Contribution to 5G-PPP pre-standards WG with at least two (2) white papers based on the experiences in the 
validation of the use cases over the 5G technologies and addressing gaps with respect to 5G-PPP vision.  
 
Task 8.4 – Innovation, data management and IPR activities (ILS, APPART, EBOS) 
This task will determine how innovation and research data will be handled during the project and describe what 
data will be collected, processed or generated, what methodologies and standards will be followed, whether and 
how this data will be shared and/or made open, and how it will be curated and preserved, with emphasis on ensuring 
GDPR compliance. 
Innovation management [ILS]: Identify and manage i nnovation from the project, advising the P C and P M and 
partners on the scope and potential of the innovations arising and paying attention to discerning IPR at regular 
checkpoints. The work also includes identifying, assisting and overseeing the filing of three (3) strategic patent 
filings, as explained in the joint commercialisation strategy in Section 2.2 .4.2. The Innovation & IPR Manager 
will be supported by an Innovation & Commercialisation Board ( I&CB), as explained in Section 3.2. Work 
includes the monitoring of the progress of development of innovative tools/services throughout the project. 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  82  
Data Management Plan (DMP) [ILS]: Development of the DMP, which will contain information related to the 
types of data the project will generate and collect, the standards that will be used to represent the data during the 
project and how partners might exploit the data resulting from the project. The DMP will set robust management 
procedures that will protect personal data collected as a result of pro ject activities, as well as client owned data, 
from unauthorised use or sharing, also supporting GDPR compliance. In addition, the DMP will include a data 
protection impact assessment of 5G-SOLUTIONS’s requirements and LLs that will be used to ensure the project 
takes a data protection-by-design approach. The DMP will be produced at M6 and finalised in M32. The project’s 
Data Protection Officer (DPO) will be available to assist - if needed - in decision-making as 5G-SOLUTIONS is 
developed to identify potential risks, mitigation solutions and support compliance. All partners have appointed 
their own internal DPO who will closely collaborate with the project’s DPO (see Section 4). 
IPR activities [ILS]: This task will cover the management of the main IPR activities taking into consideration the 
specificities of the project and the participants. The task will focus on the identification of the tangible and 
intangible assets that will be required for the project's implementation and for the use of the expected results. All 
IP produced will be monitored and the potential IPR attached to them (e.g. copyright, patent) will be also verified 
and cleared for the project's smooth execution.  Design the IPR protection strategy to promote the sustainability of 
project results, building on existing assets, considering aspects defined in Section 2.2. This strategy will be used 
as a valuable tool for managing and documenting any activity regarding the potential IPRs of the project's outcomes 
during its lifecycle and the integration of possible technical advances in their way of becoming marketable products 
and services. Establish IPR management procedures and associated activities. Conduct a search on the prior -art 
for potential inventions, trademarks and other IPRs when necessary and evaluate the costs for potential Intellectual 
Property protection. Monitor the project from the IPR point of view so that confidentiality agreements and all the 
partners’ defined IPRs (foreground and background) in the Consortium Agreement are fully respected.  
 
Task 8.5 - Clustering plan and activities for international cooperation and exchange of results (TNOR, TIM, 
NOKIA, CTTC, IRT, LMI, UOP, PIIU, WIT) 
This task will define and prepare a clustering plan with associated activities aiming at promoting the exchange of 
results, sharing knowledge and experience as well as best practices for the emerging 5G services to different 
relevant verticals. It aims to foster cooperation not only between other ICT -19 consortia, but also with other EU 
and international initiatives on 5G services with clusters in the USA, Japan, Korea and China. This direct 
cooperation among relevant 5G actors and vertical industries at an international level will create a sustainable 
meta-cluster that will help to improve even further the results from the field trials so as to promote international 
cooperation and contribute further to global 5G standardisation (leveraging the initiatives from task T8.3). For this 
purpose, consortium members wil l participate in major international 5G events as well as arrange workshops to 
meet with their counterparts outside EU. 
 
Role of main partners: ILS will lead WP8, overseeing the commercialisation, business plan and IPR activities , 
supported primarily by  NURO for the market assessment and technology monitoring, by IRT for the 
standardisation activities, by TNOR for the clustering plan and activities for international cooperation and 
exchange of results, as well as by TIM, CEL & IRIS as major supporting contributors. 
 
Justification of resources: ILS will assign resources equivalent to 1 full-time persons in WP8 over a 33-month 
period (i.e. 12PM/year), supported primarily by NURO (0.5 FTE person @6.5PM/year), TIM (0.3 FTE person 
@4PM/year), CEL, IRT and IRIS (0.25 FTE person @3PM/year). 
 
Deliverables 
D8.1A-B Market assessment & technology monitoring (ILS) [M7, M33]: Interim (v1.0) and final (v2.0) report 
detailing the business opportunities and barriers for 5G vertical applications providing a roadmap for all future 5G 
applications development. 
D8.2: Business development plan (ILS) [M33]: A business development plan for vertical sectors consolidated 
from the industry 4.0, smart urban environment and enhanced user experience clusters. 
D8.3A-B: Standardisation activities (IRT) [M8, M32]: Initial (v1.0) and final (v2.0) version of reports covering 
actions with standardisation experts based on a defined standardisation roadmap. 
D8.4A-B: Data Management Plan (ILS) [M6, M32]: The deliverable contains the initial (by M6) and final DMP.  
D8.5: Data Management report (ILS) [M32]: The deliverable contains the data management report. 
D8.6: Innovation and IP protection report (ILS) [M33]: The deliverable consists of the Innovation management 
plan and the IP protection report with the patent activities. 
D8.7A-B: Clustering plan for international cooperation and sharing of results (TNOR) [M10, M33]: Initial 
(v1.0) and final (v2.0) version of reports containing the clustering plan activities.  
 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  83  
WP # WP9 Lead beneficiary:   CTTC Start month  1 End month  36 
WP title Dissemination, Communication and Capacity Building 
Participant# 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 
Short name 
of 
participant 
TIM 
NOKIA 
APPART 
A2T 
CTTC 
CEL 
EBOS 
FNET 
ENEL 
GLAN 
IBM 
ILS 
IRT 
IREN 
IRIS 
LIVEU 
LMI 
NTNU 
NURO 
OMES 
UOP 
PGBS 
PIIU 
TNOR 
WIT 
YARA 
PM per 
participant 9 8 5 13 26 7 8 4 1 2 1 2 2 1 6 2 9 3 2 2 3 2 25 7 9 2 
 
Objectives  
• To develop and implement the dissemination strategy and plan, communication plan and related activities. 
• To organise a competition for external non -consortium members who are willing to contribute to the project 
with new components in order to address new use cases.  
• To establish the project’s EAB, create policy recommendations and coordinate with existing 5G-PPP WGs. 
• To develop and deliver the transferability and trainings.      
 
Description of work 
Task 9.1 - Dissemination and communication activities (CTTC, all partners)  
Implement the dissemination of the project goals, software products, reports, results, achievements, and other 
outputs. The target audiences will be identified, ranging from general public through scientific and academic 
communities up to specific 5G stake holders and market actors. The dissemination and communication channels 
and actions as defined in Section 2.2.1 will serve as a baseline to achieve the goals in this task. 
Dissemination of publications and white papers [CTTC]: Along the project, the 5G-SOLUTIONS partners will be 
involved in the preparation and publication of articles in scientific journals, peer-reviewed conferences, and books. 
The approved publications will be available in the internal document repository of the consortium, and those with 
appropriate copyright permissions will be publicly available through the project’s website.  
Joint dissemination actions and events [CTTC]: The project’s intermediate results will also be presented in form 
of white papers, presentations and online demos in various conferences and industrial/commercial exhibitions (e.g.  
MWC, Global 5G events, ITS Congress, EuCNC) with the purpose of commercially exploiting 5G-SOLUTIONS 
results and identifying new partners for collaboration in the EU market. At the end of the project, the task leader 
will organize the final project workshop gathering both local and international participants. To further amplify the 
potential of the initiative, the following options will be considered: (i) joint or ganisation with other relevant 5G-
PPP projects, (ii) co -hosting in the framework of other well -established events, (iii) organi sation of a dialogue 
session with other 5G stakeholders, (iv) cooperation of 5G -SOLUTIONS stakeholders with 5G -PPP Working 
Groups and mapping of results.   
Communication media [CTTC]: Ensure the creation and constant update of all web-based communication means, 
including the project’s website (from M1  by EBOS), as outlined in Section 2.2.1.2. Participants will also ensure 
visibility of the project activities through a number of traditional and electronic dissemination material edited 
electronically and sent out to a large pool of stakeholders (Table 2.5) on a quarterly basis.  
Implement the communication plan of the project and its associated activities and create a set of documents and 
tools, which can be shared with consortium partners in order to communicate the project’s goals and outcomes. 
Relevant activities include: (i) create and publish visual representations (infographics) of information, data or 
knowledge intended to present complex information quickly and clearly; (ii) provide effective support to 
dissemination and exploitation activities, whils t ensuring effective and appropriate communication towards 
various stakeholders, (iii) foster community building and realize impact on industry and research in Europe and 
worldwide, (iv) gather feedback from relevant stakeholders through networking activit ies, and (v) monitor and 
evaluate communication and dissemination activities. 
Development of the communication plan  [CTTC]: Development of the communication plan, which will 
incorporate innovative methods for sharing information with the public and interested stakeholders, in accordance 
with the dissemination strategy. 
 
Task 9.2 – Involvement of SMEs (A2T, APPART, EBOS, IRIS, PIIU)  
The overall aim of 5G-SOLUTIONS is to accelerate the European ICT ecosystem by creating and supporting new 
businesses by unlocking the commercial potential of high -value solutions. The aim of SME involvement is to 
onboard innovative companies fitting innov ations and knowledge skills developed by 5G -SOLUTIONS 
consortium. In line with the stakeholders’ engagement and community building strategy, this task will identify the 
right stakeholders in order to reach the most relevant SMEs and research institutes (Section 2.1.3.1). This task will 
organize three specific prizes for third parties (non -partners of the consortium: especially SMEs and spin -off of 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  84  
research institutes) who are willing to contribute to the project with new components in order to address new u se 
cases. After an online application, the best ideas to exploit 5G -SOLUTIONS results (Calls for Ideas) will be 
selected. The winners will receive a prize of €10.000 each, together with technical and business support from the 
main industrial partners of th e project. 5G-SOLUTIONS plans to offer a total of 3 prizes with a total  budget of 
€30.000 (planned in A2T resources, see Section 3.4). Detailed information regarding the SMEs related KPIs can 
be found in Section 2.1.3.1). 
This task aims at preparing the in formation package for the SMEs, managing the online application and the 
selection procedures for prizes, identifying the objectives and defining the guidelines, the terms and references of 
the selection procedure, for the submission of the proposals and fo r their evaluation. Considering the evaluation 
of the jury of external experts, the highest scored proposals will be selected for the prizes. Moreover, the 
participation of additional experts and the online application will be continuously monitored, and the lessons 
learned will provide inputs for the overall analysis and for future similar initiatives. Specific attention will be given 
to IPR issues. These initiatives will be launched and published in M24 and will be open for two months.  
 
Task 9.3 - Community Building (PIIU, TIM, NOKIA, CTTC, LMI, TNOR, WIT) 
Establishment and coordination of EAB [PIIU]: Establish the 5G-SOLUTIONS External Advisory Board (EAB) 
to support and direct the promotion activities of the project.  The members of the EAB will participate in the 
exploitation and innovation activities, providing input towards adoption and take -up actions. EAB members will 
participate in 4 out of the 8 project  meetings in order to collect their feedback and suggestions and to organize 
industrial workshops and panels. The interactions with the EAB are expected to be threefold: (i)  in the form of 
collection of requirements from different vertical industries, (ii) in the form of technical and strategic meetings to 
discuss design matters and use cases and (iii) in the form of presentation of main results validation from the trials.  
Policy recommendations & coordination with existing 5G -PPP Working Groups [PIIU]: Based on the project’s 
results create policy briefs. Given that within the 5G -PPP there are a number of cross -project Working Groups 
(WGs), in which shared issues and outputs of several projects are identified, 5G -SOLUTIONS will have 
representatives from partners, participating in the 5G -PPP Steering Board (TIM) and Technical Boards (TNOR) 
(see Section 3.2, ‘Commitment of 5G-SOLUTIONS to 5G-PPP program level’) as well as in 5G-PPP WGs that are 
relevant to the project in order to contribute through white papers and workshops. This participation would include 
contacts and coordination with at least the following WGs: Pre -Standardisation, 5G Architecture, SDN/NFV, 
Network management & QoS, Trials, SME and Security, including 5G-IA. 
 
Task 9.4 - Transferability and trainings (CTTC, CEL, FNET, LMI, PIIU) 
Leverage the collective 5G-SOLUTIONS consortium’s work and build a transferability framework, which will be 
fed with the experiences and lessons learned from the LLs  (deliverables D4.2 -D7.2), thus enabling the 
identification of best practices for the rollo ut of new 5G applications , guidelines, best practices, methodologies 
and other potential solutions beyond the project completion, thus leveraging EU’s funding. 5G-SOLUTIONS will 
organise trainings aiming to support 5G network stakeholders across Europe, ma ximising the use and impact of 
the project’s outputs. It will be used to provide the opportunity for hands -on experience on how to use its KPI 
visualisation system to conduct innovative use case validation. Training s will be offered through workshops, 
webinars, online documentation and community mailing lists. Training supports and facilitates academic and 
international collaboration and helps the adoption of 5G -SOLUTIONS results in particular in open source 
communities (e.g. OpenAirInterface). Training will aim at keeping participants’ knowledge and capabilities sharp 
during and after the project. Therefore, training activities include:  
• Agreeing on a concrete methodology for the design of the training programmes.  
• Developing “dynamic” online courses in a flexible and modular format so that they can be updated.  
• Developing an official enrolment process, controlled by a secure authorisation system.  
• Developing a competencies matrix and credit system for all courses, linked to on-line assessment activities, to 
allow certification (and periodical re-certification) of participants.  
• Setting up workshops and online hands-on training labs  (as an integral part of the curricula), to allow 
experimentation and piloting with the 5G -SOLUTIONS KPI visualisation system and services on test use 
cases, amplifying the opportunities to learn, develop, and apply the new skills.  
• Creating a trusted community of knowledge exchange to encourage the interactive sharing of knowledge and 
best practices between participants. 
 
Role of main partners: CTTC will lead WP9, overseeing the dissemination, communication and capacity building 
activities, supported primarily by A2T for the involvement of SMEs, as well as by PIIU for the community building 
activities.  
 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  85  
Justification of resources: CTTC will assign resources equivalent to 0.7 full-time persons in WP9 over a 3-year 
period (i.e. 9PM/year), supported primarily by  PIIU (0.7 FTE person @ 8PM/year), A2T (0.4 FTE person 
@4PM/year) and other consortium members with an effort of 1-6PM/year each for a joint contribution. 
 
Deliverables 
D9.1: Online project presence ( EBOS) [M1]: This deliverable includes the project’s website and social media 
channels that will be developed from M1 and will be regularly updated. 
D9.2A-C: Dissemination and communication plan ( CTTC) [ M3, M20, M36]: Initial and interim  reports 
containing the dissemination and communication plans and activities implemented.  
D9.3A-B: Information package for external SMEs to facilitate the design of new applications ( A2T) [M24, 
M31]: A report (D9.3A) consolidating the information package for the SMEs and procedu res for managing the 
online application and (D9.3B) the selection procedures for the submission of the proposals and their evaluation. 
D9.4A-B: External Advisory Board, policy recommendations and joint activities with 5G -PPP projects 
report (PIIU) [M15, M32]: An interim and final  report summarising the key takeaways of the EAB meetings 
formulating their policy recommendations, as well as joint actions with other 5G-PPP projects. 
D9.5 Online training program s (CTTC) [M35]:  The deliverable includes  the online training programme 
including registration processes, materials and delivery. 
 
WP # WP10 Lead beneficiary:   TIM Start month  1 End month  36 
WP title Project Management 
Participant# 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 
Short name 
of 
participant 
TIM 
NOKIA 
APPART 
A2T 
CTTC 
CEL 
EBOS 
FNET 
ENEL 
GLAN 
IBM 
ILS 
IRT 
IREN 
IRIS 
LIVEU 
LMI 
NTNU 
NURO 
OMES 
UOP 
PGBS 
PIIU 
TNOR 
WIT 
YARA 
PM per 
participant 37 2 2 0 0 15 17 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 
 
Objectives  
• To coordinate all activities in the project and ensure that partners work together effectively. 
• To ensure the project meets its contractual commitments (deliverables, quality, etc.). 
• To f acilitate the scientific and research success of the project through careful monitoring of progress, 
management of resources and coordination of activities. 
 
Description of work 
Task 10.1 - Project Coordination (TIM) 
This task will be the responsibility of the Project Manager (PM) and includes all the general management 
responsibility. By its nature, the management of RIA demands the application of mechanisms to guarantee a 
maximum grade of flexibility, whilst maintaining coherence and focus on the objectives. The PM will be supported 
by the Project Management Board. The PM will manage the cooperation with other 5G -PPP projects, relevant 
projects and participation to the 5G-PPP WGs. An Activity Report will be produced in two periods (M20 & M36) 
containing a management -level overview of the activities carried out (a description of progress toward the 
scientific and technological objectives, a description of progress toward the milestones and deliverables), 
identification of problems encountered during the project and actions taken to resolve them. 
 
Task 10.2 - Administration and resources management (TIM, EBOS, ILS, IRIS)  
This task will provide support for financial matters and project administration activities. An administration office 
created under the coordinator will support the PM to plan all project’s resources and be in charge of the day -to-
day support to partners for administrative, procedural and legal matters. This task consists of the following: 
• Resource planning and monitoring against 5G-SOLUTIONS deliveries and advancements; 
• Preparation and management of the planned project meetings; 
• Day by day administrative support to partners and financial consultancy to partners; 
• Coordination of reporting of the administrative activities. 
 
Task 10.3 - Technical Management (TNOR, NOKIA, APPART, EBOS, LMI) 
Execution of overall technical management of the project including: (a) Monitoring of the technical progress of 
the project according to the contractual schedule, (b) Liaise with EAB on technical matters, (c) Monitor the 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  86  
preparation of technical deliverables, (d) Provide an internal platform for information exchange between project 
partners, (e) Handle issues like knowledge management, and (f) Prepare technical project reviews. Apart from the 
Technical Manager ( TNOR) W P1-WP3 technical leaders as well as  EBOS as a technological task leader will 
support the technical management and have been assigned effort under this task. 
 
Task 10.4 - Quality Assurance and Risk Management (EBOS) 
Quality assurance [EBOS]: Implementation of quality assurance procedures with particular focus on monitoring 
review activities built into the work programme and submitting quality review reports. A quality plan within the 
Project Quality Handbook (deliverable D10.3) will specify the quality procedures, internal and external peer 
reviews, control, monitoring and reporting activities to be implemented in the project to ensure that satisfactory 
quality standards are met. 
Risks management [EBOS]: Implementation of the plan including the  risk library (>100 risks), processes and 
procedures for risk management and reporting to be performed by all partners in each project work package, 
covering both the project operational risks and the framework level barriers/risks. Monitor the progress to ensure 
that proactive measures are taken to mitigate risks which could jeopardise the planned project outcomes. Monitor 
the risks outlined in Section 3.2 related to the updating of the Risk Management Framework. This task will produce 
the plan (by M3, consolidated in deliverable D10.3) and will conduct quality management through the project. 
 
Task 10.5 - Legal and Ethics (CEL)  
This task will investigate, design and monitor all the procedures and protocols necessary for handling legal and 
ethical issues during the whole project lifetime. The 5G constitutes a formidable challenge from a legal and ethical 
point of view. A hyperconnected society offers to people an extraordinary capacity for augmented access to (and 
related transformation of) the reality. This world-constructive power raises several societal questions on different 
stages of inquiry: from creating a level of awareness in the population applicable to the 5G spread, to the proposal 
of new models of liability, from the review of the idea of trust in the relationships between human beings and 
between human beings and machines, up to the need of rethinking decision-making processes in the light of new 
decentralised governance in which human -discretionary procedures and automated -protocols of technological 
control can coexist. The goal of this task is to try to give a preliminary answer to all these challenges.  This task 
will also manage the ethical issues concerning with the design of the information and consent forms that will be 
used in case of involvement of human beings in the research. It will include the delivery of the ethical and legal 
guidelines early in the project to drive the partners in their research activity.  It will produce the research ethical 
protocol (D10.4) for the project, stipulating the ethical principles that the 5G -SOLUTIONS partners will adhere 
to in their work. CEL will also act as the 5G-SOLUTIONS’s Data Protection Officer (DPO) and will collaborate 
with partners’ assigned Data Privacy Single Point of Contact, supporting them during the research process to 
comply with ethical principles and the legal framework on privacy as well as maintaining track of partners activity 
for what concern local authorities’ notifications and requests for authorisations when needed. Gender balance will 
also be monitored during the course of the grant through this task to ensure that the female/male ratio is maintained 
as close to 1:1 as possible for people employed during its course, highlighting success along the way. 
 
Role of partners: TIM has the overall responsibility for the execution and strategic management of the project , 
implementing the agreed strategy and decisions taken by the project’s committees. TIM is the official contact point 
of the project with the European Commission and, as such, author ised to negotiate on behalf of the consortium.  
TNOR will undertake the project’s Technical Management. EBOS and CEL will undertake the roles of the Quality 
Assurance & Risk Management and Legal & Ethics, respectively. 
 
Justification of resources:  TIM will assign 1 full-time person for 3 7 months (i.e. 12PM/year) for Project 
Management, supported primarily by EBOS in T10.4 and CEL in T10.5 (each 0.4 FTE  person @~5PM/year) as 
well as by TNOR in task T10.3 (0.2 FTE person @2PM/year),  
 
Deliverables 
D10.1A-D10.1B: Activity Reports (TIM) [M20, M36]: Initial (by M20) and final (by M36) reports containing a 
management-level overview of the activities carried out and actions taken to correct problems. 
D10.2A, D10.2B:  Technical management handbook ( TNOR) [M2, M35]:  Technical management reports  
(initial and final versions) on the technical progress of the project. 
D10.3A, D10.3B: Project quality handbook (EBOS) [M3, M36]: Interim and final version of reports specifying 
quality assurance objectives and assessment criteria, measurements, controls and corrective mechanisms for all 
project work and deliverables. It provides the method and conditions to assess and mitigate project risks.  The final 
project management report (part of the contract) will report on a thorough quality assessment for the pr oject, on 
the implementation of the quality assurance plan, as well as how risks have been managed throughout the project. 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  87  
D10.4A, D10.4B: Report on legal and ethics monitoring (CEL) [M4, M36]: Initial and final reports on project 
activities around legal and ethics and its implementation in technical work, including the research ethical protocol. 
 
3.1.5 List of Deliverables (Table 3.1c) 
 
Table 3.1c: List of Deliverables 
1D# Deliverable name 
WP# 
Lead  
participant Type DL 
Delivery 
date (in 
months) 
D1.1A- 
D1.1B 
Definition and analysis of use cases/scenarios and 
corresponding KPIs based on LLs (v1.0 – v2.0) 
1 
FNET R PU 5, 26 
D1.2A- 
D1.2B 
Cross-domain orchestration and management challenges 
analysis (v1.0 – v2.0) LMI R PU 5, 26 
D1.3A- 
D1.3B 
Leveraging and extending 5G-PPP previous work in 
5G-SOLUTIONS (v1.0 – v2.0) TIM R PU 5, 25 
D1.4A- 
D1.4B 
Methodologies for the validation of 5G and for LL 
measurements (v1.0 – v2.0) WIT R PU 6, 25 
D2.1 Setup and operation of 5G infrastructure 
2 
TIM OTHER PU 34 
D2.2A-
D2.2D 
Specifications & design of CDSO plugins  
CDSO plugins (v1.0 – v3.0) NOKIA R 
OTHER PU 4 
12, 18, 28 
D2.3A- 
D2.3B 
Zero-touch automation mechanisms for 5G service 
lifecycle (v1.0 – v2.0) LMI R PU 8, 25 
D3.1  KPI visualisation system specifications  
3 
APPART R PU 6 
D3.1B-C KPI visualisation system design (v1.0 - v2.0) APPART R PU 11, 17 
D3.2A-
D3.2D 
KPI visualisation system and interfaces implementation 
and deployment (v1.0 – v4.0) APPART OTHER PU 12 
18, 26, 33 
D4.1-7.1A- 
D4.1-7.1B 
LL planning, setup and operational management 
handbook (v1.0 – v2.0) 
4 
IRIS R PU 13, 30 
D4.2-7.2A-
D4.2-7.2C Living Lab field trials (v1.0 – v3.0) IRIS[D4.2], 
IBM[D5.2], 
LIVEU[D6.2], 
TNOR[D7.2] 
DEM PU 19, 27, 34 
D4.3-7.3A- 
D4.3-7.3C 
LL performance evaluation and lessons learned (v1.0-
v3.0) R PU 19, 27, 34 
D8.1A-B Market assessment & technology monitoring (v1.0-
v2.0) 
8 
ILS R PU 7, 33 
D8.2 Business development plan ILS R CO 33 
D8.3A-B Standardisation activities (v1.0-v2.0) IRT OTHER PU 8, 32 
D8.4A-B Data Management Plan (initial and final) ILS R CO 6, 32 
D8.5 Data Management report  ILS R CO 32 
D8.6 Innovation and IP protection report ILS R CO 33 
D8.7A-B Clustering plan for international cooperation (v1.0-v2.0) TNOR R PU 10, 33 
D9.1 Online project presence 
9 
EBOS OTHER PU 1 
D9.2A-C Dissemination and communication plan CTTC R PU 3, 20, 36 
D9.3A-B Information package for external SMEs to facilitate the 
design of new applications (v1.0-v2.0) A2T R PU 24, 31 
D9.4A-B External Advisory Board, policy recommendations and 
joint activities with 5G-PPP projects report PIIU R PU 15, 32 
D9.5 Online training programs CTTC R PU 35 
D10.1A- 
D10.1B 
First Activity Report 
Final Activity Report 
10 
TIM R CO 20 
36 
D10.2A-B Technical management handbook (v1.0 – v2.0) TNOR R PU 2, 35 
D10.3A-B Project Quality handbook (v1.0 – v2.0) EBOS R CO 3, 36 
D10.4A-B Report on legal and ethics monitoring (v1.0 – v2.0) CEL R PU 4, 36 
                                                 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  88
3.2 Management structure, milestones and procedures  
The successful implementation of a collaborative research project, such as 5G-SOLUTIONS, with 26 partners from 
7 EU and 2 associated countries, involved in parallel, requires efficient, well -documented and structured project 
management procedures. Of parti cular importance are the clear distribution of responsibilities and the flow of 
information for building a common technical and commercialisation vision, for reporting progress, controlling the 
deliverables (Table 3.1c), the milestones (Table 3.2a), and managing and mitigating the risks (Table 3.2b). The 5G-
SOLUTIONS project management structure is designed to meet the objectives of all stakeholders, i.e. the European 
Commission and all the consortium partners by creating responsiveness to the evolving needs of the project.  
 
3.2.1 Organisational Structure 
The management structure, as shown in Figure 3.3, consists of: (i) the General Assembly (GeA), (ii) the Project 
Management Board (PMB), and (iii) Work Package (WP) Leaders, all supported by an External Advisory Board 
(EAB), an Ethics panel and an Innovation & Commercialisation Board (I&CB). The management structure has been 
designed to:  
a) Ensure that the project meets its contractual obl igations. This will entail continuous progress monitoring, 
managed by the Project Coordinator, communication and a shared understanding of roles and responsibilities. 
b) Facilitate the delivery of high -quality research and development. Central to achieving th is will be the 
coordination of the activities of the technical partners and the integration of their results. 
c) Maximise, measure and validate the impact of the system on the target audiences, both within and beyond the 
technology enhanced learning research and industry communities. 
 
Figure 3.3: Project Management Structure 
 
The PMB will focus on consortium management issues for the whole project, including technical matters, quality 
assurance, the consortium agreement, roles and responsibilities, audit certificates, ethics, gender issues, societal 
questions and liaison with 5G-PPP and other third parties and the EU. The related management functions, roles and 
procedures are described in detail in the following sections and will form the basis for the Consortium Agreement.  
 
3.2.1.1 Project governance structure 
General Assembly (GeA): Chaired by the Project Coordinator (PC), assembled once a year (i.e. in M1, M12, M24 
and M36). This is the highest decision authority in the consortium, which includes representatives from each and 
every partner, having the authority to make decisions on behalf of their respective organisations in terms of overall 
strategy and contractual aspe cts. The GeA appoints the EAB, Ethics panel and I&CB members and chairs. The 
meeting agenda includes: (a) Report by the Project Manager (PM), (b) Report by the Quality Assurance & Risks 
Manager on quality and risks issues, (c) Reports by the WP Leaders on technical implementation issues, (d) Approval 
of annual and final reports, (e) Approval of yearly implementation plans, and (f) Decisions on specific items. 
 
Project Management Board (PMB): The PMB consists of the managers of the project, as listed in Figure 3.3, brings 
to the project a wealth of experience in coordinating EU projects over many years, and ensures that the project will 
achieve its objectives and satisfy the needs of the consortium, its target stakeholders, and ultimately the end users. To 
achieve this, a clear mandate from the GeA will be provided at the project’s kick-off meeting, assigning non-strategic 
project decisions to the PMB so that day-to-day decisions (e.g. reallocate resources and/or budget to allow for the 
efficient implementation of a task, or when a decision needs to be taken  with short notice) can be taken in a timely 
manner without causing significant delays. The PMB reports to the GeA, is chaired by the Project Coordinator, and 
includes the Project Manager, the Technical Manager, the Innovation & Commercialisation Managers, the  
Dissemination & Communications Manager, the Quality Assurance & Risk Assessment Manager and the Legal & 
Ethics Manager (Figure 3.3). 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  89  
Work Package leaders (WP leaders): Produce detailed work plans and progress reports. Guard the timely and 
effective execution of the WP work and that deliverables meet the quality standards.  Control and monitor activities 
of tasks and regularly communicate, as needed, with task leaders.  M anage the information flow with other WPs, 
monitor the WP plan and maintain consistency with the project plan . Review WP results and flag up any 
underperformance. Provide input to management reports. Represent the WP at the PMB. 
 
3.2.1.2 Support bodies to the governance structure 
External Advisory Board (EAB):  The EAB comprises a well -balanced group of external “advisors” drawn from 
across Europe and embracing a range of knowledge of the project’s focus areas The EAB will offer impartial external 
advice from technological, scientific, market, regulation, ethical, societal, economic and business points of view. The 
consortium seeks to validate its technology direction with the EAB. It will be chaired by one of its members, elected 
upon the EAB’s first meeting in M6. The EAB will be consulted on occasion, and will be convened at a project meeting 
(in M6, M12, M24 & M36) to present 5G-SOLUTIONS’ progress, decisions and designs, to hear their opinion. The 
consortium will take such feedback into account to correct if necessary, or to consider relevant aspects indicated by 
the EAB. The EAB will be presented with a Terms of Reference description of the EAB role.  The consortium will 
cover EAB travel expenses to project meetings. The following persons, whose CVs are presented in Annex 1 (Section 
4), have explicitly confirmed their interest in and willingness to participate in 5G-SOLUTIONS EAB: 
1. Ms. Delphine Bernet-Travert (F), Secretary General, Independent Regulators Group, Brussels, Belgium. 
2. Ms. Afrodite Sevasti (F), Chief Technology Officer, GRNET, Athens, Greece. 
3. Prof. Nicola Blefari Melazzi (M), Director CNIT, Parma, Italy. 
4. Mr. Moisès Morató Güell (M), Energy Depart. Coordinator, Agencia d’ecologia urbana de Barcelona, Spain 
 
Letters of Support for the EAB members listed above are provided in Annex 2 (Section 4).  
 
Ethics Panel: Chaired by the Legal & Ethics Manager and includes legal advisors of t he participating members 
(experts on ethics, privacy and legal issues). An external expert will be invited to the panel, to act as independent 
reviewer and consultant to ensure decisions taken can be generalised and adopted by wider audiences. 
 
5G-PPP Community: See following Sections 3.2.1.4 and 3.2.1.5. 
 
Innovation & Commercialisation Board (I&CB) : Chaired by  the IM and includes a member from each partner 
organisation engaged in the development of the technological enablers and in the Living Labs. Their role is to specify 
in detail the commercialisation strategy and implement the process for filing patents. 
 
3.2.1.3 PMB management member roles 
The main project management roles and responsibilities per role are summarised in Figure 3. 3. The CVs of the 
personnel named are listed in Section 4, verifying their competence and expertise in leading these roles.  
 
Project Coordinator (PC): Mr. Maurizio CECCHI (TIM) 
Role: Mr. Maurizio Cecchi has a broad management profile successfully coordinating 6 previous EU ICT R&D  
projects and meeting contractual deliverables and commercial outputs. As  5G-SOLUTIONS’ PC, he will be 
responsible for the scientific management of the project, setting  strategic directions, reporting and serving as the 
liaison with the EC. As the PC and a founding member of the 5G PPP Association, he will participate in 5G -PPP 
Steering Board activities. 
Tasks:  Ensure efficient communication between the partners and mediation of any conflict as necessary. As chair 
of the GeA and PMB, he will be responsible for the integrative, cross-disciplinary issues of the project, for planning 
and for communication between the partners and the EU. Monitor the progress of the project’s results and 
implement any necessary corrective measures. Ensure any final reports submitted to the EU by the PM are complete 
and accurate. In the event of a WP giving an unexpected result, flag the issue to the PMB or GeA, accordingly, that 
will determine the appropriate course of action. Maintain team motivation, en courage creativity amongst partners 
and oversee all strands of work in the project, in close cooperation with the PM, TM and CM. 
Project Manager (PM): Mr. Valerio PALESTINI (TIM) 
Role: Mr. Valerio Palestini will manage the project, and strongly collaborate with the Technical Manager (TM) and 
the Commercialisation Manager (CM). Reports to the PC and the GeA. 
Tasks: Follow up the project status and check progress against schedule (including budget, effort), if milestones are 
met and deliverables properly produced. Submit deliverables. Produce agenda, minutes and support the PC. Manage 
the information flows between different bodies. Continuously monitor project’s progress against schedule. Organise 
resolution procedures of consortium issues. Initiate liaison actions with other projects and initiatives.  
Technical Manager (TM): Mr. Hakon LONSETHAGEN (TNOR) 
Role: Mr. Hakon Lonsethagen will guide and monitor the technical progress of the project and coordinate the 
technical work amongst work packages. Generates a technical assessment of completed and running activities. PMB 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  90  
 
3.2.1.4 Commitment of 5G-SOLUTIONS to 5G-PPP program level  
As recommended by the 5G -Infrastructure PPP working structure suggestion 92, 5G -SOLUTIONS consortium is 
aware of the contractual commitment of the 5G-PPP, as well as the organisational structure as described in the 5G-
PPP contract and its technical annex. In particular, it acknowledges the roles and commitments of the European 
Commission, the PPP partnership board, the Networld2020 ETP 93, the 5G Infrastructure Association, the Industry 
Advisory Group and commits to constructive interactions with these bodies. The proposal commits to work with its 
peer 5G -PPP projects as required under the complementary Grant Agreement clause 41.4 of the 5G -PPP grant 
agreement. This includes at least the following contributions:  
▪ Appointment of a Steering Board (SB) mandated representative (i.e. Mr. Maurizio CECCHI (TIM) who will 
act as the 5G-SOLUTIONS Project Coordinator) and full participation in the SB activities.  
▪ Appointment of a deputy SB member (Mr. Valerio PALESTINI (TIM) who will act as the 5G-SOLUTIONS 
Project Manager) to ensure the project is always represented.  
                                                 
92 https://5g-ppp.eu/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/5G-PPP-Phase-3-Working-Structure-Proposal-and-Recommendations-Version-1-0.pdf   
93 http://networld2020.eu/   
member, reports to GeA. 
Tasks:  In strong Collaboration with PM, CM, IM, WP2 & WP3 leaders and the EAB, align technical direction with 
innovation strategies and establish and maintain the 5G-SOLUTIONS design specification and solution. Monitor the 
preparation of technical deliverables. Identify trends and technologies relevant to the project.  
Quality assurance & Risk Manager (QRM):  Dr. Loizos CHRISTOFI (EBOS) 
Role:  Dr. Loizos Christofi will guide and monitor the quality plan and assess the project’s risks. Ensures high-quality 
deliverables and fully tested and reliable software systems. Quality reviews chair. PMB member, reports to GeA. 
Tasks: Performs project quality evaluation criteria, risk assessment, continuous monitoring, triggers quality 
assurance project rev iews, assessment procedures, evaluation measurements and produces quality review reports. 
Supervises implementation of quality plan. Organises and supervises quality review/peer reviews for all deliverables. 
Signs off all deliverables. Alerts the PM to any quality issues. 
Innovation & IPR Manager (IM): Dr. Pat O’SULLIVAN (ILS) 
Role:  Leads the Innovation & IPR activities that identify and manage the innovation and IP from the project as well 
as for the planning and the monitoring of all key innovation tasks.  PMB member, reports to the GeA. 
Tasks:  Advise the partners on the scope and potential of the innovations arising and paying attention to discerning 
IP at regular checkpoints. Identify trends and technologies that could be of interest to the project. Responsible for the 
creation of the Innovation progress reports for the EAB and the I&CB. Liaise with the CM.  
Commercialisation Manager (CM):  Mr. Patrick DURKIN (ILS) 
Role:  Leader of the commercialisation activities of the project. Responsible for all actions that promote the adoption 
of the project’s results and solutions by end-users; identifying potential adopters and designing the overall go -to 
market strategy and commercialisation actions. PMB member, reports to the GeA. 
Tasks: In strong collaboration with the IM, EAB and I&CB. Responsible for all activities towards market take -up, 
including showcases and project’s branding.  Check business/exploitation objectives progress. Perform business risk 
management. Lead the market assessment, feasibility study, revenue planning, business model and roadmap. 
Dissemination & Communication Manager (D&CM): Dr. Christos VERIKOUKIS (CTTC) 
Role: Leads the dissemination and communication activities. PMB Member, reports to the GeA. 
Tasks: Responsible for defining the dissemination strategy and organising the dissemination and communication 
activities, so as to maximise the project’s adoption. 
Legal & Ethics Manager (L&EM): Ms Carmela OCCHIPINTI (CEL) 
Role: Leads the research ethics that monitor the objectives and implications of the project’s research, to ensure that 
it conforms to the highest ethical standards. Responsible for the legal framework to overcome potential IPR issues , 
also acting as the project’s Data Protection Officer (DPO). PMB member, reports to GeA. 
Tasks:  Produces the  report on legal and ethics monitoring (D10.4) for the project, stipulating the ethical principles 
that the 5G -SOLUTIONS partners will adhere to in their work. The L&EM will guide partners in their work and 
provide input regarding ethics at all points of the project where research with humans is conducted. 
Work Package Leaders: WP1: Anne-Marie Cristina BOSNEAG (LMI), WP2: Udi MARGOLIN (NOKIA), WP3: 
Kostis TZANETTIS (APPART), WP4: Georgios CHALKIAS (IRIS), WP5: Dr. Mingming LIU (IBM), WP6: Baruch 
ALTMAN (LIVEU), WP7: Hakon LONSETHAGEN (TNOR), WP8: Dr. Pat O’SULLIVAN ( ILS), WP9:  Dr. 
Christos VERIKOUKIS (CTTC). 
Role: Leader of a given Work Package from WP1 to WP9. Reports to the PM. Leader of WP10 is the PM. 
Tasks: Produce detailed work plans and progress reports. Guard the timely and effective execution of the WP work 
and that deliverables meet the quality standards. Review WP results and flag up any underperformance. Provide input 
to management reports. Represent the WP at the PMB. 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  91  
▪ Full participation in the SB meetings, typically 8 to 10 per year (both physical and virtual), where program 
level decisions will be taken on actions to achieve the objectives of the program. Such decisions typically 
include; mandates for working groups, commitments to common events and joint demonstrations, approval of 
joint positions, etc.  
▪ Reporting progress against KPIs via the SB, to the EC, program reviewers and advisors, and identifying any 
points of concern where KPIs are not adequately addressed.  
▪ Participating in the consideration of, and responding to, the opinions and contributions of the EC.  
▪ Participating in the consideration of, and responding to, the opinions and contributions of the 5G Infrastructure 
Association.  
▪ Allocate resources for SB participation according to the table below.  
 
Note: The chair of the SB will be elected from candidates proposed by the SB members for a term of one year. The 
SB organisation is to be supported by the 5G-PPP Support Action. 
 
▪ Appointment of a Technology Board  (TB) mandated representative (i.e. Mr. Hakon LONSETHAGEN 
(TNOR) acting as the 5G-SOLUTIONS Technical Manager)  
▪ Appointment of a deputy TB member (Mr. Mauro BOLDI (TIM) who will act as the 5G-SOLUTIONS deputy 
Technical Manager) to ensure the project is always represented.  
▪ Full participation in the TB meetings, typically 8 to 10 per year, where joint decision will be taken towards 
achieving the technical objectives of th e program. Such decisions typically involve maintaining the overall 
technical consistency, assuring the complementarity of scope, assuring the end -to-end interoperability, and 
planning of technical planning of joint demonstrations. All cross -project technical issues will be addressed by 
the TB. The TB may propose new Working Groups (see below) to the SB for larger cross project issues.  
▪ Contributing fully to actions to determine the progress against the Technical KPIs.  
▪ Participating in the consideration of , and responding to, the opinions and contributions of the European 
Commission.  
▪ Participating in the consideration of, and responding to, the opinions and contributions of the 5G-IA.  
▪ Allocate resources for TB participation according to the table below.  
 
Note: The chair of the TB will be elected from candidates proposed by the TB members for a term of one year. The 
TB organisation is to be supported by the 5G-PPP Support Action.   
▪ Appointment of representatives from all consortium partners to joint Working Groups (WGs).  
▪ To contribute to and on occasion, edit position papers, deliverables and reports from the WGs.  
▪ To proactively drive working groups closely related to their project goals. 
 
WGs are established based on the identified needs of the community and the program, which are captured in a Terms 
of Reference (ToR) document. The mandate of a WG is approved by the SB based on the ToR. Changes to WGs will 
be based on the SB approval of updated ToR documents.  
 
Meetings of all boards and groups will be a mixture of face to face and audio/online conferences as required. 
 
3.2.1.5 Mandate of the 5G-PPP level boards that the 5G-SOLUTIONS project will support:  
The following responsibilities are indicat ive of the shared responsibility for the programme achievements that 5G -
SOLUTIONS will contribute to. It is fully understood by the 5G -SOLUTIONS consortium that, while the Grant 
Agreements (GA) are contracts at project level, success may be evaluated in th e program context. So, under the 
complementary GA clause 41.4, this programme level responsibility is understood as part of the project undertaking. 
 
The Steering Board has the following responsibilities:  
▪ Perform the executive management of the programme.  
▪ Facilitate the effective and efficient collaboration between the projects (including the resolution of conflicts).  
▪ Ensure the global consistency of the programme.  
▪ Assure sharing of information across the projects of the programme.  
▪ Ensure the programme has an effective communications strategy for promoting the results of 5G-PPP.  
▪ Perform self-assessment of the progress of the program towards achieving the program KPIs.  
▪ Initiate activities at program level when necessary.  
▪ Detect and address any risks endangering the functioning of the programme.  
▪ Delegate appropriate work items to the TB or specific WGs. 
 
The Technology Board has the following responsibilities:  
▪ To monitor the technical progress of the work.  
▪ To ensure alignment of the technical work at programme level.  
▪ To consolidate the technical requirements related to the programme.  
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  92  
▪ To assist the establishment of large-scale experimentation infrastructures through consolidation of project results.  
▪ To report technical progress regular intervals to the Steering Board and advisory functions.  
▪ To design common demonstrations and trials of project results.  
▪ To delegate appropriate work items to specific WGs.  
 
Each Joint WG has the following responsibilities:  
▪ Execute tasks spanning multiple projects that contribute to the program level objectives.  
▪ Complete the work and deliver the output according to the WG mandate.  
▪ Perform and organise the work according to the ToR document.  
 
5G-SOLUTIONS has the following Community responsibilities:  
▪ To have all beneficiaries sign the Collaboration agreement as required by Article 41.4.  
▪ To share and discuss their 5G Action Results with other participants in other 5G Actions. 
 
To demonstrate the commitment to the above, the following resource planning has been considered and budgeted: 
 
Role Resources/year Total Resources Comment 
SB participation and TB 
participation 
For each SB & TB:  
1 PM + travel costs for 3 
meetings (3x€1.250) 
For each SB & TB:  
3 PM + travel costs for 
9 meetings (9x€1.250) Resources have been 
included in task T9.3.  
Travel budget included 
under ‘other direct costs’. 
5G-PPP WG participation (e.g. Pre-
Standardisation, 5G Architecture, 
SDN/NFV, Management & QoS, 
Trials, SME and Security, 5G-IA) 
2 PM/WG to 6 WGs + 
travel costs for 1 
meeting/WG (6x€1.250) 
36 PM + travel costs 
(18x€1.250) 
Joint dissemination / demonstration 
activities 2 PM + €30k 6 PM + €90k 
Participation to 2 Global 
5G events plus 1 major EU 
conference per year.  
Programme representation 1 PM + travel to 4 
events (4x€1.250) 
3 PM + travel to 12 
events (12x€1.250) 
Speaking at conferences, 
global discussions, demos... 
 
3.2.1.6 Progress reporting 
Internal (within Consortium): Every beneficiary commits to write bi-annually a management report to the Project 
Coordinator (PC). It will describe the technical and management project work done, listing effective time spent on 
the project, mention difficulties, milestones and deliverables (or contributions to deliverables in case of joint 
deliverables) that have been reached, patents, publications, travel and visits. The PC will be able to track both overall 
budget burn rates, as well as identify potential problems with individual organisations as a result of this report. 
 
External (to EC): The PC will coordinate, consolidate and submit to the EC the interim (M20) and final Activity 
Reports (M36), deliverables and financial statements as required.  
 
3.2.1.7 Project communications and meetings 
The consortium recognises that a vital contributing factor towards the successful management of a project, is effective 
communication. A kick-off meeting is planned in M1. GeA will be assembled once a year (i.e. in M1, M12, M24 & 
M36). Some of GeA meetings and PMB meetings will coincide in time, in which case the day before the GeA 
meeting, PMB members will gather to prepare discussion about possible critical decisions that may be on the agenda 
for the GeA meeting. Additional cross-team, meetings at WP level, and face to face meetings will be organised when 
necessary, and teleconferences will be arranged at much frequent time intervals, as needed. PMB physical project 
meetings will be convened every 4 months in year 1 to boost momentum and every 6 months afterwards, while virtual 
(teleconference) PMB meetings will take place monthly to ensure adherence to the project plan and prompt reaction 
to identified risks. Thus, in total 8 face-to-face PMB meetings (i.e. in M1, M4, M8, M12, M18, M24, M30 and M36) 
are anticipated. TIM will host 6 and EBOS and TNOR will each host 1 project meeting. EAB meetings will occur in 
M4, M12, M24 and M36 coinciding with the relevant GeA meetings. Day to day communications will primarily use 
email and specialised tools for H2020 projects, such as EuresTools. These tools have been specifically designed to 
meet the needs of Horizon 2020 projects and European R&D projects, making project collaboration more effective, 
offering full compliance with EC requirements as well as maximum security and reliability. TIM and CTTC have 
been assigned budget under ‘ other direct costs’ (see Section 3.4) to purchase the licenses for consortium members 
for using EuresTools.  
 
Project mailing lists will also be established (general, administrative and per WP). Contact (email, phone and mail) 
details for all personnel involved in the project will be available on the project’s intranet (i.e. private, secure section 
in project’s website available only to consortium members), where information, ideas and documents will be shared. 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  93  
3.2.1.8 Consortium Agreement 
A Consortium Agreement (CA) will be concluded between all members of the consortium in advance of the signature 
of the Grant Agreement (GA), thus establishing a clear legal framework for the project. The CA will be based on the 
template published by the “Development of a Simplified Consortium Agreement” (DESCA 2020) group, which is a 
comprehensive, modular CA model specifically designed for ICT projects within the EU Horizon 2020 Programme94. 
The CA will complement the Description of Action (DoA), covering topics that are important for the delivery of the 
project and the management of knowledge between the partners, but are not specific to the consortium’s contract 
with the EC. 
 
3.2.1.9 Decision-making mechanisms and conflict resolution 
In the course of the project, the consortium will have to agree on and develop technical, scientific and commercial 
ideas and specifications. Most decisions about the work to be carried out in the project have been made at proposal 
stage and will be subject to the GA signed with the EC. Decision making will strive for consensus: agreement will 
usually be reached, followed by official confirmation via electronic ma il, letter or agreed written minutes. For 
important issues, the agreement may take the form of a short report that needs to be signed by those responsible for 
decision-making. The most important mechanisms for reaching decisions in a consortium with multip le partners, 
each with their own goals, is shown below. The general principle  will be to try to achieve decisions by informal 
means and consensus, using formal procedures, such as voting, only when essential. 
 
Level Decision mechanism Escalate in case: 
1. Project 
Manager 
Verbal consensus only. 
Meetings and/or audioconferences: as needed No consensus is reached 
2. Project 
Management 
Board 
Verbal consensus. Vote if necessary, decisions taken 
with simple majority. 
Meetings: every 4 months in year 1, twice a year 
afterwards (see Section 3.2.1.7). 
At least one partner insists 
3. General 
Assembly 
Voting is mandatory, decisions taken with simple 
majority. 
Meetings: once a year (see Section 3.2.1.7). 
Intervention by the EC, or legal 
action, is the only escalation 
possible.  
 
Where consensus cannot be reached, conflict resolution procedures will be used. The specific personnel roles and 
committees described above, will resolve and/or implement the necessary actions to respond to c onflict resolution. 
In particular, conflict prevention techniques will be used to avoid problems in decision-making. Should any conflict 
issues arise between parties then they will be resolved according to the following simple process:  
1) They will first be addressed within the relevant WP through discussion chaired by the WP leader.  
2) If this fails, the issue will be presented by the WP leader either to the PM, TM, PBM or the GeA depending 
on the nature of the problem (i.e. administrative, technical or business/strategic).  
3) The relevant board will resolve the issue through a majority vote, with the PC / board chair holding a casting 
vote. The EAB will be consulted in case of a high-level scientific dispute.  
4) Conflicts that cannot be resolved through those principles will be handled according to the dispute resolution 
provision set forth in the CA. 
 
3.2.1.10 Innovation Management  
The EAB will be consulted for continuous review of the innovation progress, being provided with reports at 6-month 
intervals from the GeA, in order to identify new opportunities for innovation, grow the engagement with our industrial 
partners, and seek opportunities for new collaborations. The Innovation & IPR Manager ( Dr. Pat O’Sullivan, ILS) 
will lead this activity. Specific measures to engender an innovation culture within the project will be:  
a) Project meetings will include sessions on emerging technologies/approaches to generate novel ideas for 
innovation and to ensure applied knowledge transfer to our industrial partners, and inform future innovation 
decisions. 
b) In close collaboration with the Commercialisation Manager to foster a commercialisation culture among 
group members to maximise the identification, assessment and execution of opportunities to deliver impact 
from innovation outputs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
94 http://www.desca-2020.eu/  
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  94  
3.2.2 List of Milestones (Table 3.2a) 
Table 3.2a: List of milestones (D= deliverable, as per Figure 3.2) 
MS#95 Milestone name WP Date96 Means of verification 
MS1 
End of 5G-
SOLUTIONS 
Phase 1 
WP1 
WP2 
WP3 
WP8 
M6 
Interim reports delivered for analysis of scenarios and corresponding 
target KPIs (D1.1A), cross-domain service management and orchestration 
(D1.2A), analysis of assets from previous 5G-PPP projects to be extended 
(D1.3A). 1st version of methodologies delivered (D1.4A). CDSO plugins 
design completed ( D2.2A). Prototype smart KPI visualisation system  & 
APIs specifications and architectural design  delivered (D3.1). Initial 
version of Data Management Plan delivered (D8.4A). 
MS2 
End of 5G-
SOLUTIONS 
Phase 2 
WP2 
WP3 M12 The 5G-SOLUTIONS smart KPI visualisation system  prototype, APIs 
and CDSO plugins released (D2.2B, D3.2A).  
MS3 
LL Testing 
Cycle 1 
completed  
WP2 
- 
WP7 
M18 
CDSO plugins v2.0 released (D2.2C). Smart KPI visualisation system and 
APIs v2.0 released (D3.2B). Vertical use cases validated in LLs ( with 
3GPP Rel. 15) achieving key target KPIs (D4.2-7.2A & D4.3-7.3A).  
MS4 
LL Testing 
Cycle 2 
completed  
WP2 
- 
WP7 
M26 
Upgraded (v3.0) smart KPI visualisation system with APIs released 
(D3.2C). Vertical use cases validated in LLs (with 3GPP Rel. 16) 
achieving key target KPIs (D4.2-7.2B & D4.3-7.3B).  
MS5 
LL Testing 
Cycle 3 
completed 
WP2 
- 
WP7 
M34 
Upgraded (v3.0) CDSO plugins (D2.2D), smart KPI visualisation system, 
APIs (D3.2D) released. Vertical use cases validated in LLs (with 3GPP 
enhanced Rel. 16 or Rel. 17) achieving key target KPIs ( D4.2-7.2C & 
D4.3-7.3C).  
MS6 
End of 5G-
SOLUTIONS 
Phase 3  
WP8 
WP9 
WP10 
M36 
Successful completion of the project. Dissemination, communication plan 
(D9.2), Business Development Plan  (D8.2), I PR & innovation 
management (D8.6), trainings (D9.5), project management (D10.1B) and 
QA successfully delivered (D10.3A)  
 
3.2.3 Critical Implementation Risks and Mitigation actions (Table 3.2b) 
The scientific and technical risks 
management concerns the implementation of 
the project under the responsibility of the 
QRM in collaboration with the PM, TM, IM 
and WP leaders. The management of risks 
will be part of the regular meetings of the 
PMB. Risks in this project may arise in 
different areas, such as in the technology 
maturity, the availability  of data and 
information, risks related to integration, 
stakeholder and end user engagement buy-in 
and commitment. Based on the experience 
from previous projects, and while in proposal 
phase, we have created a risk management 
plan that covers the following to ensure that 
adverse situations are properly managed 
along the evolution of the project: 
▪ Iterative identification of risks with 
adverse effects or impacts - Contingency 
plan and actions. 
▪ Evaluation, quantification and 
prioritisation (ranking) of the risks, rating 
the probabilities of occurrence (low, 
medium and high), and impact/ significance (low, medium and high). 
▪ Constant vigilance, risk monitoring and control, manage outcomes minimising negative impact.  
▪ Identifying and managing opportunities, due to potential unexpected opportunities that may arise. 
                                                 
95 Milestone number 
96 Due date, measured in months from the project start date 
Figure 3.4: Risk assessment heatmap 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  95  
The 5G-SOLUTIONS risk management plan classifies risks per category: Adoption (AD), Technology (TC), and 
Project Management (PM) risks. Figure 3.4 provides a graphical heat map/layout of indicative most important 
monitored risks described in Table 3.2b, summarising critical risks, their Probability (P) and Impact (I) on successful 
implementation of the project and the risk management actions taken by the consortium. The most crucial risks are 
included in Table 3.2b complemented by the risk library (>100 risks to be included in deliverable D10.3A) that the 
QRM will monitor, assess and propose mitigation plans.   
 
Table 3.2b: Critical risks for implementation 
Description of risk P Ι WP# Proposed risk-mitigation measures 
AD1: High expectations for software 
capabilities: All components and APIs of the 
system must be finely tuned, reliable and 
scalable to achieve the required KPIs that 
exceed usual TRL 6 solutions. 
H M 
WP1 
- 
WP3 
The KPI visualisation system, APIs and CDSO components 
and architecture will be configurable, performant and scalable. 
Security will be considered and enforced all the way through 
design and implementation. The consortium includes partners 
with sound experience in setting up such solutions. 
AD2: Less than expected performance : 
The risk is that if the 5G ecosystem fails to 
match required performance indicators, the 
solution acceptability and usefulness is 
adversely affected. 
L H 
WP2 
- 
WP7 
The performance objectives of each LL will be properly 
captured in requirements producing all the appropriate 
technology and application extensions, solution optimisations 
and tuning so that reliable performance impact indicators are 
produced.   
AD3:  Requirements capture: There is a 
risk that requirements were not well defined, 
therefore, there is no reference to track 
requirements and prove - validate the KPIs. 
L H 
WP1, 
WP4- 
WP7 
The requirements are methodologically captured in WP1 and 
in the LLs wit h end -users playing a key role. The project 
evolution process is agile, and the solution adapts to changing 
user requirements during the lifetime of the project. 
AD4: KPI complexity: There are risks 
related to meeting the ambitious KPIs during 
the field trials of the 5G-SOLUTIONS use 
cases.  
M M WP3- 
WP7 
The execution of use case trials will undergo an iterative 
feedback-loop process of validating the KPIs against different 
3GPP releases and improvements will be made after each 
testing cycle, evaluating the degree of meeting the target KPI 
values. Overall, the forward planning strategy of 5G-
SOLUTIONS minimises this risk, monitored by the PM. 
AD5: Certification for SMEs: There is a 
risk that certification for CE marking in 5G 
would be too expensive for SMEs due to the 
new standards. 
L M WP8 
WP9 
There are freely available CE marking frameworks to help 
SMEs do a gap analysis themselves, aided by well-established, 
reputable certification bodies for providing evidence that SME 
products comply with the applicable standards requirements. 
TC1 Solution components maturity:  There 
is a risk that the developed components are 
below the required level of maturity to 
sustain the difficult application requirements, 
requiring specialised customised 
development so to achieve the readiness level 
considered as app ropriate for their 
deployment in the LLs. 
H M 
WP2 
– 
WP7 
Many of the system’s components, e.g. CDSO, for the API 
construction, and KPI visualisation system internal 
components, which have been used in commercial projects, 
are project assets or belong to live developments and/or 
platform solutions ( e.g. NOKIA’s CBND,  APPART’s telco 
analytics platform). The risk minimises as 5G -SOLUTIONS 
will perform  incremental development,  configuration, 
integration an d extension of such components. For all 
solutions, there will be alternatives and options, producing less 
risky implementations properly tested before deployment. 
Risk is monitored by TM. 
TC2 Data and information security : The 
risk concerns the security and privacy of data 
and information, as security is of utmost 
importance in 5G-SOLUTIONS. 
M H 
WP1 
– 
WP3 
The smart KPI visualisation system comprises of services for 
encryption, authorisation, pseudo -anonymisation and secure 
information flows. Both the KPI visualisation system and 
CDSO will be protected behind a secured access environment 
with appropriate security policies. Risk monitored by the TM. 
TC3 Proper Testing issues:  The risk is that 
testing on the deployed ecosystem (CDSO, 
smart KPI visualisation system, APIs) was 
not done properly or not given required time. 
Therefore, finding defects while performing 
LLs use case validation. 
M M 
WP2 
- 
WP7 
Testing of the CDSO, KPI visualisation system and APIs will 
be performed at different levels (local, integration and system) 
and in dry-run tests before validation of the use cases in  the 
LLs.  Testing is a part of the quality assurance function and is 
monitored by the PM and QRM. 
TC4: Reliability issues: The risk is that the 
developed ecosystem (CDSO, KPI 
visualisation system and APIs) will not be 
reaching the proper availability and 
reliability status as required to meet the LL 
needs. 
L M WP2 
WP3 
The developed system  uses advanced software development 
tools, such as virtualisation and container-based deployment 
of services. This technology risk is addressed via integration 
of components and tested using existing software resources, 
also using cloud deployment via container technology.  The 
risk is monitored by the TM. 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  96  
 
TC5: Interoperability: There is a risk that 
the system developed will not be compatible 
and not be able to be packaged together with 
the ICT-17 facilities to form a unified 5G 
ecosystem. 
H M 
WP2 
– 
WP7 
The risk is addressed by technology, where common standards 
for data representations are adopted, APIs are constructed for 
all solutions, and 'dockerisation’, ‘compartmentation’ and 
virtualisation are used for deploying and delivering the system 
in the cloud. Both the probability and the impact of such a risk 
will be monitored and controlled by the TM. 
PM1: Large-scale complexity: The number 
of use cases and the KPIs of the use cases in 
the LL s place significant configuration 
requirements to the setup environment.  
M H 
WP4 
– 
WP7 
WP10 is closely following the progress in the LLs and the 
basic technology developments. The system provides 
configurable connectivity and individual security policies for 
accessing and delivering information. Risk is constantly 
monitored by the TM. 
PM2: Lack of coordination : In large 
projects there is a risk related to ad hoc and 
uncoordinated development, resulting in 
diverging results and components. 
M H 
WP10 
and 
WP1 
- 
WP7 
5G-SOLUTIONS will use an agile methodology. All 
developments are incremental with end -users directly 
collaborating to the development of the system components. 
The development approach and progress are constantly 
monitored by the TM and managed by the QRM. 
PM3: Technology Management, Late 
Identification of Issues : The risk is about 
technology issues and defects, or possibly 
wrong options are only discovered at a very 
late stage of the project creating high risks to 
execution or inability to perform. 
L H 
WP10 
and 
WP1 
- 
WP7 
The project plan is agile and adaptive, leaving sufficient space 
for adaptation and rework if necessary. Project planning 
allows controlling such risks, through a separate planning 
process and dedicated roles for the project and for the LL. 
However, as impact is high, it will be constantly monitored 
and mitigated by the PM and QRM.  
PM4: A use case LL is not completed: The 
risk is not to have a use case executed 
because of lack of resources and/or personnel 
changes from a project partner. 
M H 
WP4 
- 
WP7 
The PM will raise the issue urgently with the management of 
the partner organi sation, as losing one of the use cases may 
decrease the quality of the outcome of the project. If no 
alternative pilot can be found within the consortium, in 
consultation wit h the EC, the consortium will consider 
whether a replacement partner (and pilot) can be sought. 
PM5: Risks to innovation capacity 
building: Risk that technology developments 
are constrained in the 'closed world' of 
individual researchers, thereby deliveri ng 
solutions of limited scope and applicability. 
Μ Η 
WP4 
- 
WP8 
There will be a strong innovation, capacity building and 
commercialisation drive in the project. There is strong 
industrial, research and SME participation in the project. The 
TM and IM constantly monitor this risk. 
PM6: Partners engagement, mitigation in 
the event of partners not performing or 
exiting the project : Partner problems (e.g. 
underperforming partner; or a key partner 
having a key role leaves the project; 
disagreements or loss of interest). 
L H WP10 
The consortium has strong R&D delivery capacity. Partners’ 
skills fully cover needs. Care has been taken, so that all 
important technical tasks have an overlap in shared knowledge 
amongst partners, and there are always options and support to 
cover up for the work planned between partners. The CA fully 
covers conflict resolution. WP leaders monitor progress at WP 
level and communicate difficulties to PM.  However, exit of 
one of the partners , especially one  having a key role in the 
project (e.g. NOKIA) would be a serious setback. The PM will 
undertake immediate actions to find a replacement partner 
within (e.g. LMI or WIT) or outside the consortium. Potential 
external candidates have already been discussed as part of 
contingency planning. 
PM7: Project execution risks (e.g. critical 
deliverables are delayed or poor quality). 
Possible delay in work plan. 
L M WP10 
Strong dependency analysis. Quality procedures, templates 
and guidelines are key elements for mitigating this risk.  WP 
leaders will carry out d etailed monitoring of tasks, with 
specific attention to the dependencies. EuresTools will be used 
by each partner. If there is a delay with one task, the knock-on 
effects can be quickly checked and contingencies put in place 
to manage time slippage and cost increases.  
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  97
3.3 Consortium as a whole  
3.3.1 Consortium overview  
 
The 5G-SOLUTIONS consortium was formed to 
put together a group of 26 organisations from 9 EU 
and associated countries , as shown in Figure 3.5, 
that complement each other in terms of background 
knowledge, technical competence, capability of 
new knowledge creation, business and market 
experience and expertise in the 5G domain. Section 
4 provides full details of partner profiles. 
 
The consortium consists of 3 main groups of 
partners (some partners may be included in several 
groups) as illustrated in the value chain Figure 3.6, 
highlighting the complementarity and 
interdisciplinarity of the consortium: 
• Group 1 (technology suppliers  & telecom 
operators) leading the work in the technical 
work packages (WP1, WP2, WP3). 
• Group 2 (vertical end-users) leading the work 
in the LLs (WP4-WP7) with support from the 
technology suppliers and telecom operators. 
• Group 3 (ecosystem development partners) 
leading the work in  the commercialisation, IP R and international networking  (WP8), dissemination, 
communication and capacity building (WP9) with contributions by all partners, as well as project and technical 
management, quality assurance, legal and ethics (WP10).  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
There is a strong presence of SMEs  (38% of consortium members ) leading a number of tasks especially in the  
technical development, absorbing 37% of the total budget. In addition, 4 out of the 7 managerial roles in the PMB 
are undertaken by SMEs. There is a very high amount of 5G-PPP experience across the consortium, since 50% of 
the consortium members have participated or are still participating  in 24 out of the 43 5G -PPP projects and in 
several 5G-PPP Working Groups. Strong commitment to the 5G-PPP program, exploitation, IPR, communication 
and dissemination of the project’s results is demonstrated by a llocating 23% of the personnel effort to the relevant 
WPs (WP8 & WP9).  
 
The consortium members are complementary in terms of roles and interests, technical, scientific and administrative 
expertise, with little overlap, necessary to perform the development, innovation and validation tasks described in this 
proposal. The size of the consortium is justified by the core competences and expertise of each partner, to achieve 
the goals of the project.
3.4 Resources to be committed 
The allocation of person -month effort amongst the partners is summarised in Table 3.4a, according to their 
responsibilities and the resources estimated for achieving their assigned tasks. The staff effort in each WP is estimated 
based on the complexity of the tasks, complementarity of partner skills, inter -WP relationships and integration 
schedule between WPs. The overall effort of the project is 1291 person-months over the 3-year project period. Please 
refer to Part A (3 – Budget) for the detailed budget per partner.  
 
 
Figure 3.5: Overview of 5G-SOLUTIONS consortium 
Figure 3.6: Consortium value chain and complementarity 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  98  
Table 3.4a: Summary of staff effort 
 WP1 WP2 WP3 WP4 WP5 WP6 WP7 WP8 WP9 WP10 Total PM 
TIM 9 27 3 0 0 0 6 10 9 37 101 
NOKIA 5 33 0 0 0 0 3 4 8 2 55 
APPART 7 0 51 0 0 0 3 3 5 2 71 
A2T 2 4 4 0 36 0 3 6 13 0 68 
CTTC 7 0 0 0 0 12 3 3 26 0 51 
CEL 5 0 0 0 0 0 3 8 7 15 38 
EBOS 6 0 39 0 0 0 3 5 8 17 78 
FNET 8 0 0 0 0 24 5 0 4 0 41 
ENEL 2 0 0 0 30 0 5 3 1 0 41 
GLAN 3 0 0 18 0 0 5 0 2 0 28 
IBM 5 0 10 0 39 0 5 5 1 0 65 
ILS 3 0 0 0 0 0 3 32 2 1 41 
IRT 10 0 0 0 0 20 5 8 2 0 45 
IREN 2 0 0 0 22 0 5 2 1 0 32 
IRIS 9 0 0 47 0 0 9 7 6 1 79 
LIVEU 2 0 0 0 0 27 5 6 2 0 42 
LMI 12 10 9 0 0 0 2 6 9 2 50 
NTNU 5 0 0 18 4 0 4 0 3 0 34 
NURO 3 0 0 0 28 6 3 12 2 0 54 
OMES 3 0 0 18 0 0 5 0 2 0 28 
UOP 4 24 2 0 0 15 3 2 3 0 53 
PBGS 3 0 0 18 0 0 5 0 2 0 28 
PIIU 3 0 0 0 0 0 5 3 25 0 36 
TNOR 8 7 2 5 6 3 9 6 7 7 60 
WIT 10 0 17 0 0 0 3 5 9 0 44 
YARA 3 0 0 3 15 0 5 0 2 0 28 
TOTAL PM 139 105 137 127 180 107 115 136 161 84 1291 
 
• Direct personnel costs: Due to the broad geographical spread of the participants, the average person-month rates 
vary between €4.640 - €12.900. 
 
• Other direct costs : This category includes travel, equipment and other goods and services (Table 3.4b) . The 
consortium acknowledges that , although these costs represent a significant fraction (€2.020.600) of the total 
requested budget (€14.286.350), they are considered essential for the successful implementation of the project. 
The amounts quoted below represent a very good estimate for the travel, equipment and/or services required for 
the implementation of the project. Strict procedures will be followed for covering these costs, which will be in 
line with EC policies, so as to ensure fair cost claims.  
o The average expense for a 2-day return flight trip within Europe has been estimated to €1.250 per person 
based on previous actual cost figures.  
o A travel budget of €14.600-€25.000 is reserved for each partner (depending on location) to attend 8 project 
meetings over the project’s duration . Italy-based partners have been  allocated €14.600 travel budget for 
project meetings, corresponding to 6 meetings x 2 people x 2 days @€800/person + 2 project meetings x 2 
people x 2 days @€1.250/person. 
o As per Section 3.2.1.5 the coordinator has been allocated additional travel budget of €30.000 for participating 
to 5G-PPP SB (9 trips x 1 person for 2 days), to WG meetings (3 trips x 1 person for 2 days) and to 5G-PPP 
program representation (12 trips x 1 person for 2 days) . In addition, TNOR as the project’s TM, has been 
allocated a travel budget of €15.000 for participating to 5G-PPP WG meetings (3 trips x 1 person for 2 days) 
and to 5G-PPP TB (9 trips x 1 person for 2 days). 
o A travel budget of €13.500 is reserved for each of TIM, NOKIA, CTTC, EBOS, LMI, UOP, TNOR and WIT 
for participating to 3 x 5G major events/year (9 trips x 1 person for 3 days @€1.500). Additionally, €12.000 
has been allocated to the coordinator for participating in 8 conferences/joint 5G-PPP events (8 trips x 1 person 
for 3 days @€1.500). 
o A travel budget of €20.000 has been allocated to PIIU to cover the travel budget for the 4 EAB members to 
4 of the project’s meetings.  
o UOP has been allocated a travel budget of €27.000 for remote 5G RAN installation, configuration, upgrades 
to Ireland (IBM & GLAN) and Brussels (PGBS) (3 locations x 3 trips/location x 2 persons @1.500/person) 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  99  
o CTTC, IRT, LIVEU and NURO has been allocated each €15.000 travel budget for use case field trials in 
Patra (3 trips x 2 persons for 1 week @€2.500/person). In addition, NURO has been allocated an additional 
travel budget of €18.000 for use case field trials in Norway (3 trips x 2 persons for 1 week @€3.000/person). 
o ILS has been allocated €5.000 travel budget for IPR meetings with advocates (4 trips for IM for IP filing -
related meetings, for 2 days @€1.250) 
o The coordinator will host 6 out of the 8 project meetings and a budget of €4.000 is reserved per meeting to 
cover the costs related to conference room rental, audio-visual equipment and catering for ~50 persons for 2 
days. EBOS and TNOR will host each, one project meeting. 
o A budget of €120.000 has been allocated to TNOR for supporting and upgrading the 5G-VINNI Norway 
facility 1 year after the completion of the 5G-VINNI project, so as to be able to perform advanced 5G 
validation on the latest available 3GPP release.  These costs will cover the support fees payable to the 
vendors of the 5G-VINNI 5G core and RAN equipment. It is noted that no such fees have been included 
for TIM or UOP since they own and manage the equipment and as such, relevant personnel effort has been 
assigned for this purpose in task T2.1. 
o A budget of €180.000 has been allocated to TNOR for purchasing, installing and incrementally upgrading  
two new commercially available 5G RAN nodes with MEC capabilities at both Trondheim and Herøya in 
Norway for conducting industry 4.0 and smart city/port use cases. TNOR intends to enable 2 additional 5G 
RAN nodes for free in Trondheim, Norway to facilitate the advanced validation of the measurements and 
strengthen the Smart City IoT-based field trials.  
o A budget of €130.000 has been allocated to UOP for purchasing, installing and incrementally upgrading 3 
portable 5G RAN nodes (one in IBM campus, one in GLAN and the last one in PBGS factory premises – the 
two nodes in factory premises will  include integrated core and RAN fun ctionality, as they will act as 
standalone private 5G networks). 
o A budget of €120.000 is reserved for ILS for three (3) patent filings, the cost breakdown of which is listed in 
Table 2.11 in Section 2.2.4.2. 
o A budget of €49.000 is reserved for IRIS for equipment used for the integration of the HSI system into PGBS 
& GAMB factories (€25k for opto-mechanical and electronic adaptations; €12k Leasing of HSI camera; €6k 
cloud hosting fees; €6k for UE components for setting up 5G infrastructure for the use cases). 
o A budget of €46.000 is reserved for LIVEU for two systems each consisting of an LU600 HEVC or newer 
product with several 5G modems in each and a receiving server for the Media & Entertainment LL trials. 
o A budget of €100.000 is reserved for PBGS for chemical consumables (a few tones of detergents to emulate 
a live production plant ), equipment adaptation with 5G sensors, 3D printing components , re -wiring and 
product delivery devices for machines to emulate a working production factory plant. 
o A budget of €100.000 has been allocated to IREN for Electric Vehicle charging stations able to dynamically 
modulate the power based on grid and market constraints ( UC2.2 - €50k); Distributed indoor sensors (post 
fiscal meters) (€5k); Energy Management Systems and Aggregator Management system (UC2.1-2.2 €45k) - 
all equipment is prototype and will be depreciated within the project’s period. 
o A budget of €35.000 has been allocated to ENEL for 5 quick charging stations for Electric Vehicles up to 
43kW per station, including 5G modems in each of the charging stations used in the Energy Living Lab. 
o A budget of €15.000 has been allocated to IBM for IoT sensors for use in the smart buildings Living Lab. 
o NURO and UOP have been allocated €15.000 each for purchasing in total ~100 5G enabled smartphones for 
friendly end users to test media use cases and provide feedback for the business validation of the use cases. 
o A budget of €20.000 has been allocated to APPART for cloud hosting fees for the KPI visualisation system. 
o CTTC has been allocated €15.000 for dissemination material consumables (roll -up banners, brochures, 
promotional video, etc.) and €50.000 for participating with a booth in 2 major 5G events (e.g. MWC 2020 & 
2021) for promoting 5G-SOLUTIONS. In addition, LIVEU has been allocated €30.000 for participating with 
a booth in one professional media exhibition to promote 5G-SOLUTIONS. 
o A budget of €8.000 has been reserved for YARA for 5G enabled UE devices for the smart port Living Lab. 
o A budget of €30.000 has been allocated to A2T for the Prize for Call for Ideas for SMEs. 
o A budget of €5.000 per workshop has been allocated to partners hosting workshop events (i.e. TIM: 2 
workshops, CTTC, IRT and TNOR: 1 workshop each) for covering room rental and catering for 70 people.  
o A budget of €26.000 has been allocated to both TIM (€14k) and CTTC (€12k) for purchasing licenses for all 
partners for EuresTools cloud-based project management/communication tool for 36 months.  
o A budget of €1.000-€7.500 is reserved for the financial audit for those partners whose requested funding 
exceeds €325.000. 
 
• Sub-contracting: A budget of €30.000 has been allocated to ENEL for subcontracting certain data analysis 
activities in task T4.3 (Energy LL) that cannot be fully undertaken by ENEL. In particular, subcontracting will 
support ENEL in data analysis/post-processing (e.g. statistical analysis) from LL2 Energy vertical.  
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
G                Page  100  
Table 3.4b:‘Other direct cost’ details (only for partners where they exceed 15% of personnel costs) 
CTTC Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 48.500 €20.000 for project meetings; €15.000 for use case validation in Patra; €13.500 for 
participating to 3 x 5G major events/year  
Other 85.000 €50.000 for a booth in 2 major 5G events; €15.000 for dissemination material consumables; 
€5.000 for hosting 1 workshop; €12.000 for EuresTools Tracker; €3.000 audit fees 
TOTAL 113.500  
ENEL Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 14.600 Project meetings as explained above 
Equipment 35.000 5 quick charging stations for EV and 5G modems per charging station for the Energy LL 
TOTAL 49.600  
ILS Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 25.000 €20.000 for project meetings; €5.000 for IPR meetings with advocates. 
Other  124.000 €120.000 for 3 patent filings; €4.000 for audit fees;  
TOTAL 149.000  
IREN Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 14.600 Project meetings as explained above 
Equipment 100.000 Equipment (as analysed above) for the Energy Living Lab 
TOTAL 114.600  
IRIS Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 20.000 Project meetings as explained above 
Equipment 49.000 Equipment for the integration of HSI system into PGBS & GAMB factories (see above) 
Other 3.000 Audit fees. 
TOTAL 72.000  
LIVEU Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 35.000 €20.000 for project meetings; €15.000 for use case validation in Patra. 
Equipment 76.000 €46.000 for LL equipment as above; €30.000 for a booth in a professional media exhibition 
Other 2.000 Audit fees. 
TOTAL 113.000  
NURO Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 53.000 €20.000 for project meetings; €33.000 for use case validation in Patra and in Norway. 
Equipment 15.000 ~50 x 5G enabled smartphone UEs for use by friendly users in Media & Entertainment LL 
Other  3.000 Audit fees;  
TOTAL 71.000  
OMES Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 20.000 Project meetings as explained above 
Equipment 10.000 5G sensors and transmitters for use in the Factories of the Future Living Lab 
TOTAL 30.000  
UOP Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 60.500 €20.000 for project meetings; €27.000 for 5G RAN installation; €13.500 for 5G events 
Equipment 145.000 €130.000 for 3 portable 5G RAN nodes including integrated core and RAN functionality for 
the 2 private 5G nodes; €15.000 for ~50 x 5G enabled smartphone UEs  
Other 2.000 Audit fees. 
TOTAL 207.500  
PBGS Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 20.000 Project meetings as explained above 
Equipment 100.000 Chemical consumables and equipment in PGBS factory plant (see above) 
Other 2.000 Audit fees. 
TOTAL 122.000  
TNOR Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 46.000 €17.500 for project meetings; €3.750 for 5G-PPP WG meetings; €11.250 for TB meetings; 
€13.500 for 3x5G major events/year. 
Equipment 180.000 €180.000 for 2 new 5G RAN nodes  
Other 133.000 €120.000 for supporting 5G-VINNI 1 year after its completion; €4.000 for hosting 1 project 
meeting; €5.000 for hosting 1 workshop event; €4.000 for audit fees. 
TOTAL 359.000  
 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 101 
 
Sections 4-5 
 
5G Solutions for European Citizens 
 
Table of Contents 
Section 4: Members of the consortium .......................................................................... 102
4.1 List of Participants ........................................................................................................................ 103 
4.1.1 TELECOM ITALIA SPA ....................................................................................................................... 104 
4.1.2 ALCATEL-LUCENT ISRAEL LTD...................................................................................................... 107 
4.1.3 APPART AE NEW TECHNOLOGIES COMPUTER AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS ................. 109 
4.1.4 APPLIED RESEARCH TO TECHNOLOGIES SRL ............................................................................ 113 
4.1.5 CENTRE TECNOLOGIC DE TELECOMUNICACIONS DE CATALUNYA .................................... 114 
4.1.6 CYBERETHICS LAB SRLS .................................................................................................................. 118 
4.1.7 EBOS TECHNOLOGIES LIMITED ...................................................................................................... 120 
4.1.8 ELLINIKI ETAIRIA TILEPIKOINONION KAI TILEMATIKON EFARMOGON AE ..................... 122 
4.1.9 ENEL X SRL .......................................................................................................................................... 125 
4.1.10 GLANBIA INGREDIENTS IRELAND DESIGNATED ACTIVITY COMPANY ............................ 127 
4.1.11 IBM IRELAND LIMITED ................................................................................................................... 128 
4.1.12 INLECOM GROUP .............................................................................................................................. 131 
4.1.13 INSTITUT FUR RUNDFUNKTECHNIK GMBH .............................................................................. 134 
4.1.14 IREN SPA ............................................................................................................................................. 137 
4.1.15 IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS, SOCIEDAD LIMITADA ......................................................... 139 
4.1.16 LIVEU LTD .......................................................................................................................................... 143 
4.1.17 L.M. ERICSSON LIMITED ................................................................................................................. 145 
4.1.18 NORGES TEKNISK-NATURVITENSKAPELIGE UNIVERSITET NTNU ..................................... 147 
4.1.19 NUROGAMES GMBH ........................................................................................................................ 149 
4.1.20 ORBIS MES ......................................................................................................................................... 152 
4.1.21 PANEPISTIMIO PATRON .................................................................................................................. 153 
4.1.22 PROCTER & GAMBLE SERVICES COMPANY NV ....................................................................... 156 
4.1.23 PROMOZIONE PER L INNOVAZIONE FRA INDUSTRIA E UNIVERSITA ASSOCIAZIONE .. 158 
4.1.24 TENELOR ASA ................................................................................................................................... 159 
4.1.25 WATERFORD INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY .............................................................................. 162 
4.1.26 YARA INTERNATIONAL ASA ......................................................................................................... 166
4.2 Third parties involved in the project (including use of third-party resources) ....................... 168 
4.2.1 TELECOM ITALIA SPA ....................................................................................................................... 168 
4.2.2 ALCATEL-LUCENT ISRAEL LTD...................................................................................................... 168 
4.2.3 APPART AE NEW TECHNOLOGIES COMPUTER AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS ................. 168 
4.2.4 APPLIED RESEARCH TO TECHNOLOGIES SRL ............................................................................ 168 
4.2.5 CENTRE TECNOLOGIC DE TELECOMUNICACIONS DE CATALUNYA .................................... 170 
4.2.6 CYBERETHICS LAB SRLS .................................................................................................................. 170 
4.2.7 EBOS TECHNOLOGIES LTD .............................................................................................................. 170 
4.2.8 ELLINIKI ETAIRIA TILEPIKOINONION KAI TILEMATIKON EFARMOGON AE ..................... 170 
4.2.9 ENEL X SRL .......................................................................................................................................... 170 
4.2.10 GLANBIA INGREDIENTS IRELAND DESIGNATED ACTIVITY COMPANY ............................ 171 
4.2.11 IBM IRELAND LIMITED ................................................................................................................... 171 
4.2.12 INLECOM GROUP .............................................................................................................................. 171 
4.2.13 INSTITUT FUR RUNDFUNKTECHNIK GMBH .............................................................................. 171 
4.2.14 IREN SPA ............................................................................................................................................. 171 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 102 
 
4.2.15 IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS, SOCIEDAD LIMITADA ......................................................... 173 
4.2.16 LIVEU LTD .......................................................................................................................................... 173 
4.2.17 L.M. ERICSSON LIMITED ................................................................................................................. 173 
4.2.18 NORGES TEKNISK-NATURVITENSKAPELIGE UNIVERSITET NTNU ..................................... 173 
4.2.19 NUROGAMES GMBH ........................................................................................................................ 173 
4.2.20 ORBIS MES ......................................................................................................................................... 173 
4.2.21 PANEPISTIMIO PATRON .................................................................................................................. 173 
4.2.22 PROCTER & GAMBLE SERVICES COMPANY NV ....................................................................... 173 
4.2.23 PROMOZIONE PER L INNOVAZIONE FRA INDUSTRIA E UNIVERSITA ASSOCIAZIONE .. 173 
4.2.24 TENELOR ASA ................................................................................................................................... 173 
4.2.25 WATERFORD INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY .............................................................................. 173 
4.2.26 YARA INTERNATIONAL ASA ......................................................................................................... 174 
Section 5: Ethics and Security ........................................................................................ 175
5.1 Ethics ............................................................................................................................................... 175 
5.1.1 Humans being involvement in the project’s research process ................................................................ 175 
5.1.2 Objectives, methodology and impact ...................................................................................................... 176 
5.1.3 Personal data processing ......................................................................................................................... 176
5.2 Security ........................................................................................................................................... 177
5.3 Declarations from participants regarding Ethics and Security ................................................ 177 
5.3.1 TELECOM ITALIA SPA ....................................................................................................................... 177 
5.3.2 ALCATEL-LUCENT ISRAEL LTD...................................................................................................... 177 
5.3.3 APPART AE NEW TECHNOLOGIES COMPUTER AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS ................. 178 
5.3.4 APPLIED RESEARCH TO TECHNOLOGIES SRL ............................................................................ 178 
5.3.5 CENTRE TECNOLOGIC DE TELECOMUNICACIONS DE CATALUNYA .................................... 178 
5.3.6 CYBERETHICS LAB SRLS .................................................................................................................. 178 
5.3.7 EBOS TECHNOLOGIES LIMITED ...................................................................................................... 178 
5.3.8 ELLINIKI ETAIRIA TILEPIKOINONION KAI TILEMATIKON EFARMOGON AE ..................... 178 
5.3.9 ENEL X SRL .......................................................................................................................................... 178 
5.3.10 GLANBIA INGREDIENTS IRELAND DESIGNATED ACTIVITY COMPANY ............................ 178 
5.3.11 IBM IRELAND LIMITED ................................................................................................................... 178 
5.3.12 INSTITUT FUR RUNDFUNKTECHNIK GMBH .............................................................................. 178 
5.3.13 IREN SPA ............................................................................................................................................. 178 
5.3.14 IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS, SOCIEDAD LIMITADA ......................................................... 179 
5.3.15 LIVEU LTD .......................................................................................................................................... 179 
5.3.16 L.M. ERICSSON LIMITED ................................................................................................................. 179 
5.3.17 NORGES TEKNISK-NATURVITENSKAPELIGE UNIVERSITET NTNU ..................................... 179 
5.3.18 NUROGAMES GMBH ........................................................................................................................ 179 
5.3.19 Orbis MES ............................................................................................................................................ 179 
5.3.20 PANEPISTIMIO PATRON .................................................................................................................. 179 
5.3.21 PROCTER & GAMBLE SERVICES COMPANY NV ....................................................................... 179 
5.3.22 TENELOR ASA ................................................................................................................................... 179 
5.3.23 WATERFORD INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY .............................................................................. 179 
5.3.24 YARA INTERNATIONAL ASA ......................................................................................................... 180 
Annex 1: 5G-SOLUTIONS External Advisory Board ................................................ 181 
Annex 2: Letters of Support from the 5G-SOLUTIONS EAB Members .................. 183 
Annex 2B: 5G-VINNI Support Proposal for ICT-19 projects .................................... 188 
Annex 3: Ethics Supporting Documents ………………………………..…………….190 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 103 
 
Section 4: Members of the consortium
4.1 List of Participants  
No. Participant organisation name Type[1] Short Name Country 
1 TELECOM ITALIA SPA[2] IND TIM IT 
2 ALCATEL-LUCENT ISRAEL LTD [2] IND NOKIA IL 
3 APPART AE NEW TECHNOLOGIES COMPUTER AND 
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SME APPART EL 
4 APPLIED RESEARCH TO TECHNOLOGIES SRL SME A2T IT 
5 CENTRE TECNOLOGIC DE TELECOMUNICACIONS DE 
CATALUNYA [2] RTO CTTC ES 
6 CYBERETHICS LAB SRLS SME CEL IT 
7 EBOS TECHNOLOGIES LTD SME EBOS CY 
8 ELLINIKI ETAIRIA TILEPIKOINONION KAI TILEMATIKON 
EFARMOGON AE IND FNET EL 
9 ENEL X SRL  IND ENEL IT 
10 GLANBIA INGREDIENTS IRELAND DESIGNATED 
ACTIVITY COMPANY  IND GLAN IE 
11 IBM IRELAND LIMITED [2] IND IBM IE 
12 INLECOM GROUP SME ILS BE 
13 INSTITUT FUR RUNDFUNKTECHNIK GMBH [2] SME IRT DE 
14 IREN SPA IND IREN IT 
15 IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS, SOCIEDAD LIMITADA  SME IRIS ES 
16 LIVEU LTD [2] SME LIVEU IL 
17 L.M. ERICSSON LIMITED [2] IND LMI IE 
18 NORGES TEKNISK-NATURVITENSKAPELIGE 
UNIVERSITET NTNU ACA NTNU NO 
19 NUROGAMES GMBH [2] SME NURO DE 
20 ORBIS MES SME OMES IE 
21 PANEPISTIMIO PATRON [2] ACA UOP EL 
22 PROCTER & GAMBLE SERVICES COMPANY NV IND PGBS BE 
23 PROMOZIONE PER L INNOVAZIONE FRA INDUSTRIA E 
UNIVERSITA ASSOCIAZIONE [2] RTO PIIU IT 
24 TENELOR ASA[2] IND TLNR NO 
25 WATERFORD INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY [2]  ACA WIT IE 
26 YARA INTERNATIONAL ASA IND YARA NO 
 
 
  
                                                 
[1]ACA = Academic, IND= Industrial partner, RTO = Research & Technology Organisation, SME = Small or Medium -size 
Enterprise.  
[2] Participates in 5G-PPP Projects 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 104 
 
4.1.1 TELECOM ITALIA SPA 
Short name TIM  
Country Italy 
Type Industrial 
Number of employees 55.000 
Website www.telecomitalia.it  
Short Profile 
The Telecom Italia Group  is a major Italian enterprise and a key European strategic ICT player with an active 
presence all around the world: Europe, United States of America, Africa and Asia.  Driven by technological 
innovation and a commitment to service excellence, the companies of the Group operate in fixed-line and mobile 
telecommunications, Internet & Media, Information Technologies.  
 
Most of the R&D activities of the Group are performed inside the Innovation and R&D Departments of Telecom 
Italia Spa (TIM) involving around 4,500 researchers and technicians with an average investment of 650 M€ per 
year. The Innovation department ensures the supervision of technological innovation for the Group, scouting for 
new technologies and engineering operations for services and network platforms.  The work carried out by the 
Innovation Department is the outcome of a strategic partnership with the main manufacturers of 
telecommunications equipment and systems, and with centres of excellence in research at the most highly qualified 
national and international academic institutions.  
 
On the international level, TIM has pledged a substantial commitment to the task of standardisation and has been 
involved from the beginning in the European Union Framework Programmes starting with the first pilot projects 
of the ESPRIT programme in 1983 and continuing as one of the primary European collaborators in terms of both 
finance and the number of projects. In Horizon 2020 and FP7, TIM is at present involved in more than 40 Projects 
and has so far participated in more than 90 projects.  
 
TIM is currently involved in the experimental evaluation of 5G technologies in Italy, as well as in the definition 
of the standards in 3GPP and ITU -R. TIM is a member of both 3GPP and ITU. TIM is also a member of ETSI, 
one of the only three bodies officially recognised by the EU as a European Standards Organisation (ESO). In 
addition, TIM participates in NGMN Alliance aiming to expand the communications experience by providing a 
truly integrated and cohesively managed delivery platform that brings affordable mobile broadband services to the 
end user with a particular focus on 5G while accelerating the development of LTE-Advanced and its ecosystem. 
 
The coordination of the project 5G-SOLUTIONS represents for TIM a clear opportunity for the investigation in 
a real and multi-national environment of the feasibility of the 5G use cases with a particular focus on the integration 
of verticals needs and interests. The results and learnings gained through the participation and coordination of the 
project will be of absolute relevance once transferred to the internal TIM business departments, and moreover the 
interaction of the project activities with the “Torino 5G” environment will represent a highly relevant synergy. 
 
TIM is leading the initiative “Torino 5G” to test and validate sel ected 5G use cases in the city of Turin, where 
TIM has its “Innovation” department, previously known as CSELT (TIMLab). The Innovation department has 
produced hundreds of patents and publications on the telecommunications related topics in recent years, standing 
at the forefront of research and actively contributing to standardisation in 3GPP and ITU-R. 
 
TIM is also involved in the 5G trials supported by the Italian Ministry of Economic Development with a specific 
consortium of partners. Moreover, TIM is leading an experimental trial in San Marino, the first covering an entire 
nation. 
Role in the project 
TIM will coordinate the 5G-SOLUTIONS project given their wide expertise and experience in developing mobile 
networks including 5G facilities and its proven project management track record in the Horizon 2020 programme.  
TIM is the coordinator of 5G -EVE project (5G-PPP Phase 3) , and in 5G -SOLUTIONS TIM is committed to 
provide, upgrade and support their 5G-EVE Turin facility to the latest 3GPP releases, fully aligned to the 5G-PPP 
and 5G-SOLUTIONS roadmap, during and after the completion of their ICT-17 project and until the completion 
of 5G-SOLUTIONS. This will enable the validation of the Smart Energy vertical use cases to the latest available 
5G 3GPP releases in order to ensure that the latest features will be supported before actual widespread 5G 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 105 
 
deployments in Europe. During 5G-SOLUTIONS, TIM will investigate (in a real and multi-national environment) 
the feasibility of the 5G trials with a particular focus on the integration of verticals needs and interests. TIM will 
use the results from 5G SOLUTIONS to consolidate the achievements in the 5G experimental acti vities at 
European level through the 5G-PPP programme.  
 
TIM considers the cooperation in 5G-SOLUTIONS with the most significant players in the sector gathered in the 
consortium, a viable opportunity to trigger broad European-wide 5G adoption. The inclusio n of 5 key verticals 
and the evaluation of their needs is of paramount importance for the business development direction of TIM in the 
future evolution of the telecommunications market. The network slicing and the orchestration of the slices among 
different network segments is relevant from a technical point of view, as well as the consolidation of the KPIs and 
the related performance ensured by 5G future deployments. These changes need to be thoroughly validated and 
5G-SOLUTIONS fully answers these needs. 
 
TIM will also have an active participation in standardisation fora to disseminate 5G-SOLUTIONS’ results. 
 
TIM will lead WP10 Project Management, as well as the following tasks: 
• T1.3 Leverage, build upon and extend previous and ongoing work from EU funded 5G-PPP projects and 
2nd phase of 5G standardisation 
• T2.1 Interfacing and setup of ICT-17 5G E2E facilities to enable LL operation 
• T10.1 Project coordination  
• T10.2 Administration and resources management 
 
Key personnel 
Maurizio Cecchi (Male) is the Head of Collaborative Research at Telecom Italia Spa (TIM). He represents TIM 
R&D positions and strategy in the Italian Ministry of Research. Since 1998 he is in charge of the “International 
R&D projects” D epartment (TIM Lab) and from 2006  onwards h e is also the Head of the  Project Financing 
Department. He is a founding Member of the 5G Infrastructure Association. Maurizio is currently the Project 
Coordinator of 5G-EVE ‘5G European Validation platform for Extensive trials ’, one of three 5G -PPP 
infrastructure projects started on the 1st July 2018 aiming to implement and test advanced 5G infrastructures in 
Europe. In addition, he has successfully coordinated six past projects of previous ICT R&D Programs.  He 
coordinates Telecom Italia’s invest ments in the FI -PPP Program (FI -WARE and 4 Use Cases: FINSENY, 
FIContent, Instant Mobility and SafeCity) and 5G-PPP. He represents TIM in the Industrial Strategic Group that 
is launching the new PPP industrial initiatives in Horizon 2020. Maurizio will undertake the role of the Project 
Coordinator in 5G-SOLUTIONS.  
 
Mauro Boldi (Male) is a Senior Technical Manager at TIM. He joined the Telecommunications Laboratory and 
Study Centre of the current Telecom Italia Group  (CSELT) in 1998, where he has been involved in radio access 
network topics, with activities on antenna and propagation, radio over fiber solutions, collaborative networks, 
energy efficiency. He is the author of patents and papers on the aforementioned topics, and he is a lso the author 
of the chapter on Coordinated Multipoint solutions in the book entitled “Mobile and wireless communications for 
IMT-advanced and beyond”, published after the Winner+ project in 2011. Recently Mauro was a contributor in a 
book titled ‘ 5G Mobile and Wireless Communications Technology ’ working specifically in the chapter on 5G 
Architecture. Mauro is also the editor of the book “5G System Design” published by Wiley in 2018. Mauro has 
been involved in many European projects, among which Winner+ (where he led the activity on CoMP), Artist4G, 
Earth (where he was one of the authors of the deliverables on the functional split, one of the basis of the 5G 
architecture), METIS and METIS II, 5G MoNArch, where he is the leader of the Work Package on dissemination 
topics. In 5G-SOLUTIONS Mauro will serve as the Deputy Technology Board representative. 
 
Dr.Valerio Palestini (Male) is a Senior Project Manager at TIM. He received his Dr. Eng. Degree in electro nic 
engineering from Politecnico di Torino, Italy, in 1983. Since then he has been with CSELT, now called TIMLab, 
working on mobile and fixed radio systems, and taking several responsibility roles within the organisation. 
Dr.Valerio is responsible for the “investment” on European Funded Projects & Energy Efficiency, including the 
participation in EU initiatives: FP7 program, European Institute of Innovation and Technology (EIT) ICT-Labs 
and now H2020. Examples of recent or current projects include Earth [FP7]: ‘Energy Aware Radio and neTwork 
tecHnologies’, Artist4G  [FP7]: ‘ Advanced Radio Interface Technologies for 4G Systems ’, Metis  [H2020]: 
‘Mobile and wireless communications E nablers for Twenty-twenty (2020) Information Society -II’, iJoin [FP7]: 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 106 
 
‘Interworking and JOINt Design of an Open Access and Backhaul Network Architecture for Small Cells based on 
Cloud Networks’, Miwaves [FP7]: ‘Beyond 2020 heterogeneous wireless network with millimeter wave small cell 
access and backhauling’. In addition, he served as a Project Leader in FREEHANDS ‘Fibre and Radio Enhanced 
IntEgration in Heterogeneous Access Networks for Delivery of broadband Services’ of Eurescom (closed 2003), 
Celtic/Winner+, and more recently FP7 Artist4G, Earth, Metis, and H2020 METIS II, Fantastic-5G, Flex5Gware, 
5G-Crosshaul. Dr.Valerio will serve as the Project Manager of 5G-SOLUTIONS.  
 
‘Telecom Italia Spa will appoint, from project’s start, a data privacy single point of contact in its team, in view of 
ensuring all of Telecom Italia Spa project’s data processing activities, if any, are fully compliant with GDPR.’ 
Relevant Publications 
1. P. Marsch, O. Bulakci, O. Queseth, M. Boldi “5G System Design – Architectural and functional considerations 
and long term research”, Wiley 2018. 
2. Patrick Marsch, Icaro Da Silva, Ömer Bulakci, Milos Tesanovic, Salah Eddine El Ayoubi, Thomas Rosowski, 
Alexandros Kaloxylos, Mauro Boldi, “5G Radio Access Network Architecture – Design Guidelines and Key 
Considerations”, published in 2016. 
3. Patrick Marsch, Olav Queseth, Salah -Eddine El Ayoubi, Michał Maternia, Mikko A. Uusitalo, Rauno 
Ruismaki, Milos Tesanovic, Ale xandros Kaloxylos, Icaro Da Silva and Mauro Boldi, “5G Radio Access 
Network Design - A Brief Overview on the 5G-PPP Project METIS-II”, EuCNC Special 5GPP session. 
4. Francesco Mauro, Sabella Dario, Caretti Marco, Dell’Aera Gian Michele, Palestini Valerio, Gio vanni Stea, 
Antonio Virdis, Niccolò Iardella, Antonio Frangioni. “C-RAN and the Virtualization path toward 5G system”. 
5. Philippe Chanclou, Luiz Anet Neto, Hiroo Suzuki, Jin Wang, Yiran Ma, Mauro Renato Boldi, Kazuki Tanaka, 
Seungjoo Hong, Claudio Rodrigues “How does Passive Optical Network tackle Radio Access Network 
evolution?” JOCN 292145. 
Relevant Projects 
1. 5G-EVE [5G-PPP Phase 3]: ‘5G European Validation platform for Extensive trials’. 5G-EVE aims to create 
the foundations for a pervasive roll -out of end -to-end 5G networks in Europe. The project supports this 
fundamental transition by offering to vertical industries and to all 5G-PPP Phase3 projects facilities to validate 
their network KPIs and their services. A2T is designing and developing a testing environment to perform 5G 
experimentations in a real 5G facility to ease the development of e-mobility and smart mobility applications. 
https://www.5g-eve.eu/.    
2. 5G-MoNArch [5G-PPP Phase 2 ]: ‘5G Mobile Network Architecture for diverse services, use cases, and 
applications in 5G and beyond’ which is about the experimental evaluation of the 5G end to end architecture 
in two selected testbed, one of them in Turin coordinated by TIM. (01/07/2017 – 30/06/2019).  
3. Flex5Gware [5G-PPP Phase 1]: ‘Flexible and efficient hardware/software platforms for 5G network elements 
and devices’ aims to deliver a software platform' - considering increased capacity, reduced energy footprint, 
as well as scalability and modularity - to enable a smooth transition from 4G mobile wireless systems to 5G. 
(01/04/2015 – 30/06/2017). https://flex5gware.eu/.  
4. 5G-Crosshaul [5G-PPP Phase 1]: ‘The 5G Integrated fronthaul/backhaul’ aims at developing a 5G integrated 
backhaul and fronthaul transport network enabling a flexible and software -defined reconfiguration of all 
networking elements. (01/07/2015 – 31/12/2017). http://5g-crosshaul.eu/.  
5. 5G-ENSURE [5G-PPP Phase 1]:  ‘5G Enablers for Network and System Security and Resilience ’. 5G-
ENSURE aim was to deliver a 5G Security Architecture, shared and agreed by the various 5G stakeholde rs. 
(01/11/2015 – 31/10/2017) http://www.5gensure.eu/. 
Significant Infrastructure 
In the context of 5G-EVE TIM will make available locations, equipment and instrumentation in relation to the test 
scenarios identified during the progress of the project taking into account the coexistence of industrial testing 
going on in TIM test plant and labs. In particular, TIM will offer laboratory infrastructure and instrumentation and 
a pilot location, in the framework of the “Torino 5G” testbed. 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 107 
 
4.1.2 ALCATEL-LUCENT ISRAEL LTD 
Short name NOKIA 
 
Country Israel 
Type Industrial 
Number of employees ~80 (Cloudband group, Israel), 102.761 worldwide 
Website www.nokia.com  
Short Profile 
NOKIA is a global leader in technologies connecting people and things. Powered by the innovation of Nokia Bell 
Labs and Nokia Technologies, the company is at the forefront of creating and licensing the technologies that are 
increasingly at the heart of our  connected lives. With a state -of-the-art software, hardware and services for any 
type of network, NOKIA is uniquely positioned to help communication service providers, governments, and large 
enterprises deliver on the promise of 5G, the Cloud and the Internet of Things.  
 
Alcatel-Lucent Israel Ltd (NOKIA), is composed of two separate research and development groups, namely, 
CloudBand Business Unit and Bell-Labs Israel.  
 
CloudBand, a pioneer in the Network Functions Virtualisation (NFV) industry, coined the term “Virtual Telco” 
over 5 years ago and developed a ground -breaking, market-ready, Telco-grade end-to-end NFV solution that is 
inherently built for carrier applications. With CloudBand, operators can quickly deploy a proven NFV solution 
that enables them to leverage the cloud to work faster and more cost effectively. The CloudBand portfolio makes 
it simple to host, orchestrate, automate, and manage virtualised network functions (VNFs) and services. Its scalable 
and flexible line of products optimises and automates network operations to create a lean environment that helps 
reduce time to revenue for new services. The recently optimised CloudBand portfolio includes CloudBand 
Infrastructure Software (NFVI & VIM), CloudBand Application Manager (VNFM ), and CloudBand Network 
Director (NFVO) – for an ultimate fit to the ETSI NFV Management and Orchestration (MANO) framework. This 
reduces complexity and ensures applicability to single and multi-vendor infrastructures. 
 
The Bell Labs team is largely dedicated to NOKIA’s CloudBand solution. The local Bell Labs team contribute to 
CloudBand’s efforts by leading the research in the field of cloud software foundations and NFV cognitive cloud 
management, devising a new dev -ops paradigm optimised for the Telecom industry, also exploring its security 
aspects. Powered by the innovation of Bell Labs and CloudBand technology, NOKIA is leading the research and 
development in the NFV domain in Europe. Indeed, it is participating in three 5G -PPP Phase 1 projects and 1 
phase 2 project, namely, Superfluidity, SONATA, and CogNet in phase 1 and NGPaaS in phase 2. The Israeli 
team is fully dedicated in innovation paving the path to 5G. 
Role in the project 
NOKIA will provide and extend the functionality of their Cloudband Director to develop the cross domain service 
orchestrator in 5G -SOLUTIONS, so as  to be able to  bind all use cases across different 5G facilities, and in 
particular, the 5G-EVE Turin and 5G -VINNI Norway and Patra facilities. Also, NOKIA will contribute in 5G-
SOLUTIONS through network slicing and Zero Touch Configuration capabilities. 
 
NOKIA will lead WP2 ‘5G Infrastructure setup and operational readiness ’, contributing in the design and 
development of  the necessary plugins in an existing Cross -Domain Service Orchestrator (CDSO - NOKIA’s 
CloudBand Network Director), so as to act as an umbrella orchestrator to enable automatic, unified, concurrent 
service provisioning, management and cross -domain orchestration across the ICT -17 facilities.  In addition, 
NOKIA will lead the following tasks: 
• T2.2 CDSO plugins design & development for cross-domain orchestration 
• T2.3 Integration of CDSO plugins with the 5G ICT-17 facilities 
 
Key personnel 
Mr. Udi Margolin (Male) leads Cloudband’s contribution to Openstack and other open source projects and from 
2015, he is also leading NOKIA’s participation in 5G-PPP Phase 1 project  CogNet contributing in numerous 
articles.  From 2017 onwards, he is also involved in 5G-PPP Phase 1 project SONATA. Currently, he is leading 
NOKIA’s CloudNative migration efforts . Udi holds a BSc in Electrical Engineering from Tel Aviv University 
(1987). He joined CloudBand at its very beginning in 2011 as part of the architecture team, leading projects  of 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 108 
 
analytics and monitoring with collaboration with Bell Labs (NOKIA’s research division). Udi will lead WP2 ‘5G 
Infrastructure setup and operational readiness’. 
 
Mrs. Noa Koffman (Female)  is an R&D manager at NOKIA's CloudBand's NFV orchestrator product - 
CloudBand Network Director, and an experienced Software Engineer. She holds a BSc in Computer Science and 
Computational Biology from the Hebrew University, Jerusalem. Currently, she is managing a team of Backend 
and User Interface engineers, developing a platform for network service and resource orchestration. Also, she is a 
contributor to Openstack, and a few years ago held a session regarding distributed Telco applications as part of an 
Openstack summit in Vancouver 2015. 
 
Maty Grosz (Male) is leading the DevOps and Automation group, making sure the team has the right tools, 
procedures and plans in place. He holds a BSc in Computer Science and Mathematics, and MBA - both from Tel-
Aviv University, Israel. Maty has more than 19 years in the industry, from which the last six years in NOKIA. He 
started as a developer and progressed to manage the DevOps team.  Maty will serve as the data privacy single 
point of contact of NOKIA in 5G-SOLUTIONS. 
Relevant Publications 
1. U. Margolin, A. Mozo, B. Ordozgoiti, D. Raz, E. Rosensweig, I. Segall, “Using Machine Learning to Detect 
Noisy Neighbors in 5G Networks”, EUCNC 2016, Jun 2016 
2. Bora Caglayan, Teodora Sandra Buda, Haytham Assem, Imen Grida Ben Yahia, Jaafar Bendriss, Angel 
Martin, Gorka Vel ez, Udi Margolin, Itai Segall, Antonio Pastor, Diego Lopez, Alberto Mozo, Bruno 
Ordozgoiti, Marius-Iulian Corici, Mikhail Smirnov, Kateryna Timoshenko, Olga Uryupina, Joe Tynan, Martin 
Tolan, “Cognitive Services Portfolio for 5G Network Management”, 2nd Workshop on Network Management, 
Quality of Service and Security for 5G Networks colocated with EUCNC 2017, Jul 2017 
3. Haytham Assem, Jaafar Bendriss, Teodora Sandra Buda, Imen Grida Ben Yahia, Diego Lopez, Udi Margolin, 
Angel Martin, Alberto Mozo, Marouane Mechteri, Kieran Sullivan, Martin Tolan, Book chapter for 5G 
European Vision 
4. Bruno Ordozgoiti (UPM), Sandra Gómez Can aval (UPM), Alberto Mozo (UPM), Udi Margolin (Nokia), 
Elisha Rosensweig (Nokia), Itai Segall (Nokia), “Deep convolutional neural networks for detecting noisy 
neighbours in cloud infrastructure”, Apr 2016 
Relevant Projects 
1. NGPaaS [5G-PPP Phase 2]: ‘Next Generation Platform as a Service’ . The purpose of the project is to b uild 
Telco-grade PaaS: to support different configurations and a large set of deployment options. NOKIA is a Work 
Package leader in NGPaaS. (01/06/2017 – 31/05/2019). 
2. CogNet [5G-PPP Phase 1 ]: ‘Building an Intelligent System of Insights and Action for 5G Network 
Management’. NOKIA has implemented a Machine Learning based solution for the placement of resources in 
the datacentre. NOKIA also initiates and leads the Noisy Neighbor scenar io and demo. It set s up a demo 
platform based on Cloudband and generated data for detection of the Noisy Neighbor phenomena using 
Machine Learning algorithms (01/07/2015 – 31/12/2017) http://www.cognet.5g-ppp.eu/. 
3. SONATA [5G-PPP Phase 1]: ‘Service Programming and Orchestration for Virtualized Software Networks ’ 
is developing a NFV framework that provides a programming model and development toolchain for virtualised 
services, fully integrated with a DevOps -enabled service platform and orchestration s ystem. CloudBand is 
highly involved in the project, taking part in all work packages and leads several Tasks.  (01/07/2015 – 
31/12/2017) http://sonata-nfv.eu/. 
4. SUPERFLUIDITY [5G-PPP Phase 1]: ‘Superfluidity: a super-fluid, cloud-native, converged edge system’. 
In physics, Superfluidity is a state in which a matter behaves like a fluid with zero viscosity. This project aims 
at achieving Superfluidity in the Internet: the ability to instantiate services on -the-fly, run them anywhere in 
the network (core, aggregation, edge) and shift them transparently to different locations. NOKIA’s CloudBand 
served as the technical manager for the first year of Superfluidity, and led the architectural work package. In 
addition to that, CloudBand collaborated on all other work packages, particularly with respect to orchestration. 
Finally, CloudBand VNFM solution was leveraged to demonstrate dynamic scaling and migration of a video 
distribution solution provided by Unified Streaming based on a modeling developed by Intel in collaboration 
with Citrix, ONAPP and NOKIA.(01/07/2015 – 31/03/2018) http://superfluidity.eu/. 
Significant Infrastructure 
CloudBand platform is composed of CloudBand Infrastructure Software, CloudBand Application Manager, and 
CloudBand Network Director – to fit the key NFV management and orchestration (MANO). 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 109 
 
4.1.3 APPART AE NEW TECHNOLOGIES COMPUTER AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
Short Name APPART 
 
Country Greece 
Type Small or Medium-size Enterprise  
Number of employees 21 
Website www.app-art.gr    
Short Profile 
AppArt AE New Technologies Computer and Telecommunications  (APPART) is a software development 
company founded in 2012, based in Athens, Greece with activities focusing mainly in the design and development 
of Turn-Key Software Applications and Solutions targeted for Mobile Telecom Operators, Banking and Health 
Organisations of Public and Private Sector. 
 
APPART provides solutions in the areas of Analytics, Real Time Campaigns’ Management and Next Generation 
Messaging. Because of its focus and expertise, APPART is, also, able to design and implement Custom Solutions 
and deliver on demand Services, covering specialised business needs. Furthermore, APPART is highly interested 
in research because it provides the fundamental basis for efficient implementations. APPART participates in 
various funding programmes, both natio nal and European, which provide opportunities for the expansion of the 
company and innovation growth. 
 
APPART team includes professionals with long commercial and market experience as well as technical expertise. 
This valuable know-how along with notable distinctions in project implementations, guarantee efficiently designed 
solutions and reliable delivery performance. APPART team has also a long experience in various aspects relating 
to the implementation of Software Solutions including but not limited to development, integration, customisations, 
migration, bespoke developments, as well as, in providing quality software maintenance and support services. This 
unique speciali sation has driven APPART’s focus on software development providing the company with a  
competitive advantage of being able to address business requirements in the most innovative and flexible ways. 
 
Finally, yet importantly, APPART allows great flexibility in terms of understanding the business needs and 
proposing the most suitable solution s. Their experience lies mainly within Telecoms world, however due to the 
fact that they can provide on demand solutions, they are able to utilise technology and methods in order to fulfil 
business needs and requirements of other industries as well. APPART  is in addition, familiar with the Telecoms 
Organisations network, technologies, way of working and business processes. It is part of the Telecoms world 
vision for the future, which incorporates the mobility and the speed. APPART has all the necessary tech nical 
competencies, which enrich continuously their skills and familiarisation with new technologies and trends. Taking 
into consideration all the above and the fact that APPART is an integral part of this ecosystem it is obvious that 
the company has the e xperience, the know -how and the capacity required in order to deliver successfully the 
undertaken projects. 
Role in the project 
APPART, as a software development company specialising in designing and implementing its own solutions in 
the Business Intelligence and Analytics area, will participate in 5G SOLUTIONS project by providing its Cortex 
Analytics platform to be fused with IBM’s Watson Cognitive platform , which will create the real -time KPI 
visualisation system. More specifically, APPART will contribute in a) the detailed design of the KPI visualisation 
system in logical and physical level b) the design and implementation of all the integration points of t he KPI 
visualisation system with the ICT -17-2018 E2E facilities and c) the development and deployment of all the 
necessary components comprising the KPI visualisation system, including deep learning algorithms for graph data, 
in order to meet the required specifications. 
 
APPART will lead WP3  ‘Technological enablers for Living Labs’, as well as the tasks found below: 
• T3.1 KPI visualisation system specifications and design; 
• T3.2 KPI visualisation system components development, real -time collection and analysis of data feeds, 
and privacy aspects; 
• T3.4 Integration of KPI visualisation system and APIs with the ICT -17-2018 E2E facilities and dry -run 
interworking tests. 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 110 
 
Key Personnel 
Kostis Tzanettis (Male) is a Senior Software Engineer with experience and focus in the design and development 
of software solutions. He is the Leader of APPART’s Software Development Team, responsible for managing the 
team in terms of functional analysis, solution design, tasks breakdown, work prioritization and a llocation. 
Moreover, Kostis is the Software Architect of Cortex Analytics Platform, managing the project team and 
participating himself in platform development and support tasks. More specifically, he is responsible for the 
application of internal software development methodology, for writing programming code, for reviewing the code, 
conducting software deployments and for maintaining software versioning procedures. His experience in APPART 
is complemented by his participation, through a supporting role, in the management of the project team designing 
and developing APPART’s Cortex Campaigns’ Management Platform. Finally, Kostis has a leading role in the 
project team of HEARTEN, a European Funding Program under the frames of Horizon 2020, which aims at 
creating an ICT environment that will enable Heart Failure patients and their caregivers (doctors, relatives etc) to 
achieve sustainable behavior change regarding their adherence and compliance. Previously employed by 
MSENSIS S.A. as Senior Software Engineer, h e has taken part in various Telecommunications projects leading 
the architectural analysis and the definition of the final architecture of various solutions. He obtained his bachelor 
in Electrical and Computer Engineering with specialisation in Telecommunications from the National Technical 
University of Athens, Greece, followed by a master in Communications and Signal Processing from the Imperial 
College, London, UK. Kostis will be the Leader of WP3 ‘Technological enablers for Living Labs’. 
 
Evi Tziola (Female) is an experienced Software Engineer occupied in APPART since the very beginning of the 
company, undertaking demanding tasks in various company projects. Contributing with her wide knowledge, she 
is part of the project team designing and developing Co rtex Campaigns’ Management platform, participating in 
the analysis and evaluation of customers’ requests as well as in the unit and integration testing, as necessary, in 
order to verify the functionality agreed. She is, also, a member of the Cortex Analyti cs Project, being in close 
cooperation with the Software Architect in order to secure that customer requirements and business needs are met 
and assisting in the tasks of work prioritization and assignment in order to secure efficient implementation 
according to customer desired time frames. She is also member of HEARTEN, a European Funding Program under 
the frames of Horizon 2020, which aims at creating an ICT environment that will enable Heart Failure patients 
and their caregivers (doctors, relatives etc) to achieve sustainable behavior change regarding their adherence and 
compliance. With a rich working experience as a former employee of INNOVA S.A. and INTRACOM S.A., she 
has obtained her bachelor degree in Electrical and Computer Engineering with specialisation in 
Telecommunications from the National Technical University of Athens, Greece, and enriched her studies with a 
master in Techno-Economic Systems from the same Institute. 
 
Panagiotis Liakos (Male) is a Software Engineer at APPART contributing with his wide range of expertise in the 
company’s projects. He is a member of the project team designing and developing Cortex Campaigns’ 
Management Platform and more specifically he is one of the senior developers handling and implementing issues 
related to Databases (MongoDB / Oracle) as well as developing new complex functionalities. He is also working 
as a Researcher/Developer  for the Department of Informatics of the University of Athens, after obtaining his 
bachelor in Informatics and Telecommunications and  his master in Computer Systems’ Technology from the 
specific department, where he is currently doing his PHD research. Last but not least, he is occupied as Tutor 
Assistant at the Department of Informatics of the Athens University of Economics and Business and has a plethora 
of publications and awards in national and international conferences. Panagiotis has hands-on experience with Big 
Data processing frameworks such as Hadoop and Spark. He has extended Apache Giraph with memory -efficient 
edges representations and he is the maintainer of the official Apache Giraph Juju charm. In addition, he has 
employed several machine-learning models (Neural Networks, Decision Trees, Naive Bayes classifiers, Support 
Vector Machines) for his research in the fields of opinion formation and topic-sensitive hidden-web crawling. 
 
Christina Chatzalioti (Female) is a Software Engineer, member of APPARTs software development team with 
experience in the projects related to Cortex Analytics and Cortex Multi -Channel Campaigns’ Manage ment 
Platforms. She is working on the design and implementation of new functionalities and enhancements as well as 
on improvements of existing ones. With a wide knowledge of programming languages and tools, she participates 
in the analysis of customers’ requirements and their transformation to technical design. Moreover, she participates 
in the development of source code, either on the back-end layer or the front end in order to deliver successful and 
on time implementations. Her strong motivation and hard work made her a valuable member of AppArt staff, able 
to elaborate and fully respond to the fast paces of the company. She has obtained her bachelor degree in Informatics 
and Telecommunications form the National and Kapodistrian University of Athens. She is a fast learner, she is 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 111 
 
interested on elaborating on technical issues and she actively participates in the handling process of any technical 
challenge. 
 
Myrto Ramopoulou (Female) graduated from the Department of Statistics at Athens University of Economics 
and Business. She has attended the following seminars in order to develop her profile: “Master Level Seminar of 
CSAP (Certified Systemic  Analyst Professional- Project Management Sector)” form the University of Piraeus, 
“Internal Inspector of Quality Management System” and “Data Protection Officer” from TUV Austria HELLAS. 
She has previous working experience in a Law Firm where she was daily in communication with foreign partners 
and clients (Law Firm was in the list of Recommended Lawyers of the US Embassy in Athens), she undertook 
Legal Contracts and Press Translations and she was responsible for various other office administration tasks. In 
APPART, she is responsible for managing the office daily operations, including the monitoring and the inspection 
of company’s Quality Management System as well as the proper application of the GDPR legislation in all 
company’s business lines and daily a ctivities. Myrto will serve as A PPART’s data privacy single point of 
contact in 5G-SOLUTIONS.  
 
Software Products and Services 
Cortex Analytics Platform 
Relevant Projects 
1. HEARTEN (mHealth mobile app) [EU]: APPART is participating in a Consortium for the implementation 
of HEARTEN program. HEARTEN consortium join forces to engage all actors related to the management of 
patients suffering from Heart Failure (HF), towards developing a multi-stakeholder patient centered mHealth 
ecosystem. HEARTEN approaches the problem of medication non-adherence and treatment non-compliance 
of HF patients by challenging specific scientific and technological objectives. HEARTEN will design, develop 
and validate an ICT co-operative environment that will enable the HF patients to achieve sustainable behavior 
change regarding their drug adherence and compliance. At the same time, HEARTEN will motivate and 
empower the ecosystem actors (doctors, caregivers, nutritionists, physical activity expert, psychologist) to be 
further engaged to HF patients’ routine improving HF management. The target is to create an ecosystem that 
will empower collaboration among its actors gathering valuable information and analysing it in favour of the 
patient, enhancing patients’ health status. The idea is to utilise biosensors and sensors that will reflect the 
health status of the patient and will identify whether the patient adheres to the administered drugs. Concerning 
biosensors, the breath biosensor will be integ rated into the smartphone while the saliva biosensor will be 
integrated into the patient’s cup. Additional, commercially available sensors will be used for monitoring the 
ECG, the blood pressure, physical activity and temperature constituting the sensor kit of the patient. The input 
data are complemented with nutrition information from the patient’s smartphone, weight monitoring through 
wireless weight scales as well as the patient’s profile and information directly added by the patient himself, 
the caregivers, and the healthcare professionals. The multi-parametric data are transmitted to the HEARTEN 
cloud architecture, where a knowledge management system analyses them and delivers critical information at 
hand. 
Significant Infrastructure 
APPART has designed, developed and implemented its own Analytics and Reporting Application Platform, named 
Cortex, which handles a significant number of data volumes and size, covering a wide range of commercial and 
technical business needs: 
• AppArt Cortex Analytics Platform for Network Performance Monitoring: APPART has implemented a 
large number of KPIs for various Operator’ s systems such as VAS (MSP), Core (Transit, SGSN, NGIN, 
CSCF, SBC, NGME etc.), Transmission and Radio (4G) network. The friendly and easy-to-use Graphical 
User Interface designed by APPART allows its users to have full visibility to KPIs measurements and reports 
and thus have quickly the necessary information on their hands in order to take important business decisions.  
• AppArt Cortex Platform for Customer Experience Analytics: APPART has implemented its own Cortex 
Analytics Platform for the presentation and the overall satisfaction of business customers, based on specific – 
configurable – KPIs. The platform provides to Operator’s Corporate Marketing, the ability to have access to 
aggregated and valuable KPIs measuring the customer satisfaction e.g. detailed call analysis etc. Cortex 
solution manages various data in such a way so that useful results are produced quickly and in one place. By 
accessing the application, the user gains at a glance visibility and understanding of the customer’s experience 
allowing him/her to take any relevant actions. In case the user wishes to receive further analysis, he / she may 
have access to further information by choosing the relevant parameters. 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 112 
 
• AppArt Cortex Platform for Customer Care Customer Experience Analytics: The purpose of this 
application is to support the Customer Complaint Management process of Operator’s Customer Care team. 
Cortex platform pr ovides a dedicated User Interface delivering Customer Experience and Network 
Performance metrics and views, based on relevant data collected from the Operator’s network. This particular 
application is extremely demanding in terms of speed and efficiency, s ince the relevant views, metrics and 
analysis are immediately available to the Customer Care agent, within the duration of a short customer call 
handling.  Immediate response and useful feedback are critical parameters for the operations of this 
department. 
• AppArt Cortex Campaigns Management Platform for Real Time Multi Channel Campaigns’ 
Management for Telecom Operators: APPART has designed, developed and implemented a complete, turn-
key, real time Contextual Campaigns Management platform for targeted prom otions and offers to the 
Operator’s subscriber base. Cortex platform is designed to operate irrespective of the exact customer’s 
resource systems. To achieve this, the application is built using a highly modular design, which allows 
functionality to be added easily. 
o Customer Segmentation – that is used to build subscribers’ profile based on usage patterns and other 
personalized information. Usage patterns can be configured based on usage events and any available 
customer information from Operator’s network (i.e. tariff plan, active subscriptions, passport etc.) and 
non-personally identifiable info such as age and income group, according to any combination and 
level. 
o Events Driven Campaigns - allowing to effectively drive customer behaviour as the platform ca n 
easily react to customer events in near real time (i.e. a top-up, low credit, change in spending patterns, 
change in usage patterns etc.). Cortex Campaigns Management platform allows effective creation of 
Event-driven marketing (EDM) - a new discipline w ithin marketing, where commercial and 
communication activities are based upon the measurement of relevant and identifiable changes in a 
customer's individual needs. It is a new and highly successful approach to direct marketing and 
traditional Database and  Segmentation only marketing, which typically use statistical methods and 
analysis. 
o Communication Channels - The campaign is channel agnostic allowing effective communication. 
However, the campaign also allows for configuration of separating channels (i.e. make an offer only 
available through SMS or mobile app, IVR etc.). 
o Analytics Reporting Tool  – An essentia l tool used to track responsiveness towards every single 
campaign. Reporting tool works in real -time and post processing mode, creating all the necessary 
charts for the marketer to decide how to handle every single customer.  
o Innovative campaigns concepts – A plethora of campaign types such as Regional Target Campaigns, 
Campaigns through Shops, Welcome, Data, Social Media, Digital Campaigns. 
o Powerful algorithms effectively minimising churn rates and customer turnover and allowing for 
creation of proactive campaigns.  
o Highly modular solution in terms of functionality and integration with Operator’s network 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 113 
 
4.1.4 APPLIED RESEARCH TO TECHNOLOGIES SRL 
Short Name A2T 
 
Country Italy 
Type Small or Medium-size Enterprise 
Number of employees 3 
Website www.ares2t.com  
Short Profile 
Applied Research to Technologies (A2T) is a young Italian SME founded in September 2013, recognized as start-
up of “Sapienza” University of Rome. The main aim is fostering innovation from applied research results, 
conducted by the university and connected research centers, to develop novel Clean Technologies ready for the 
market. Characterized by strong capability in designing, planning, implementing and providing assistance for 
innovative solutions, with particular focus on Smart Electro -Mobility, Future Internet, Mobile Apps, Cognitive 
Techniques, Big Data and Machine Learning, Ares2T is distinguished by freshness of thought (70% ownership 
under 40 y/o), ability to innovate and ability to execute. Presented as one among the “100 Italian Energy Stories” 
at Paris COP21 Conference and European Parliament by ENEL CEO, Ares2T covers very well the skills required 
to address the market, the industry, the management and the R&D issues that a start-up has to face. 
 
A2T’s work will be partly implemented by the Consortium for Research in Automation and Telecommunication 
(CRAT) which traditionally provides the scientific contributions at the basis of A2T’s technology transfer activity. 
CRAT will be considered as linked third party  within the framework of 5G -SOLUTIONS. Further details are 
provided at Section 4.2 Third parties involved in the project (including use of third-party resources) at Section 4.2 
‘Third parties involved in the project’.  
 
Role in the project 
In 5G-SOLUTIONS, A2T will be mainly involved in LL2 Vertical Energy. In particular A2T, will be responsible 
for the design and simulation of control strategies enabling the execution of Living Lab’s use cases, development 
and deployment of software modules implementing the control strategies, technical support for the validation 
activities executed by ENEL and IREN. 
 
A2T will lead the following tasks: 
• T5.1 LL planning, setup and operational management 
• T5.2 LL2 execution: Smart Energy 
• T9.2 Involvement of SMEs 
 
Key Personnel 
Vincenzo Suraci (Male) is the Head of Technology and Product Development at A2T and a Board Member. He 
studied Computer Engineering at the University of Rome “Sapienza”  and later pursued a PhD in Systems 
Engineering in the department of Computer Systems Science”. Currently, he is an Associate Professor at e-Campus 
university and a project manager at CRAT. His main research interest is to develop and to adapt advanced control 
and operational research theories (reinforcement learning, column generation, hybrid automata, and discrete event 
systems) to solve challenging and emerging engineering problems in 5G networks: connection admission control, 
access technologies selecti on, profiled QoE/QoS cognitive control, resource management over heterogeneous 
technologies, convergence of heterogeneous access networks. Vincenzo will serve as A2T’s data privacy single 
point of contact in 5G-SOLUTIONS.  
Relevant Publications 
1. Di Giorgio A., Liberati F., Canale S., “Electric vehicles charging control in a smart grid: A model predictive 
control approach”, Control Engineering Practice, Elsevier, 22, 147-162 (2014), ISSN: 0967-0661, IF 1.814 , 
DOI:10.1016/j.conengprac.2013.10.005. 
2. Di Giorgio A., Liberati F., “A Model Predictive Control-based approach for Plugin Electric Vehicles charging: 
power tracking, renewable energy sources integration and driver preferences satisfaction” , In: Plug In Electric 
Vehicles in Smart Grid: Charging Strategie s, Springer, 2015, ISSN: 16121287, DOI: 10.1007/978 -981-287-
317-0_7. 
3. Liberati F., Mercurio A., Zuccaro L., Tortorelli A., Di Giorgio A., “Electric Vehicles Charging Load 
Reprofiling”, 22nd Mediterranean Conference on Control and Automation MED14. IEEE, pp. 728-733, 
Palermo, I, June 16 – 19 2014, DOI: 10.1109/MED.2014.6961460. 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 114 
 
4. Di Giorgio A., Liberati F., “Near real time load shifting control for residential electricity prosumers under 
designed and market indexed pricing models”, Applied Energy, Elsevier, 128,  119-132 (2014), ISSN: 0306-
2619, IF 5.613, DOI 10.1016/j.apenergy.2014.04.032. 
5. Di Giorgio A., Liberati F., Lanna A., Pietrabissa A., Delli Priscoli F., “Model Predictive Control of Energy 
Storage Systems for Power Tracking and Shaving in Distribution Grids”, IEEE Transactions on Sustainable 
Energy, IEEE, 2016, ISSN: 1949-3029, IF: 3.727 (2015). 
Relevant Projects 
1. INCENSe [EU]: ‘INternet Cleantech ENablers Spark’. A2T was selected between 14 more interesting start-
ups across Europe who applied to the 1st Call  in order to develop a solution for the Smart Electro -Mobility 
arena, called Charge Advisor, to provide a 360 degree charging experience from (real-time) control of electric 
grid constraints vs every involved grid actor, up to smart charging management and best charging station 
selection for user recharge.(01/09/2014 – 30/09/2016). 
2. 5G-EVE [5G-PPP Phase 3]: ‘5G European Validation platform for Extensive trials’. 5G-EVE aims to create 
the foundations for a pervasive roll -out of end -to-end 5G networks in Europe. The project supports this 
fundamental transition by offering to vertical industries and to all 5G-PPP Phase3 projects facilities to validate 
their network KPIs and their services. A2T is designing and developing a testing environment to perform 5G 
experimentations in a real 5G facility to ease the development of e-mobility and smart mobility applications. 
https://www.5g-eve.eu/.    
 
4.1.5 CENTRE TECNOLOGIC DE TELECOMUNICACIONS DE CATALUNYA 
Short Name CTTC  
Country Spain 
Type Research 
Number of employees 102 
Website www.cttc.es  
Short Profile 
The Centre Tecnològic de Telecomunicacions de Catalunya (CTTC), located in Castelldefels (Barcelona), is a 
private non-profit R&D center with substantial funding support from the autonomous government of Catalonia 
(Generalitat de Catalunya) along with research and development part nership with industry. So far, four distinct 
research divisions have been identified in the Research Unit: Communication Networks, Communication 
Subsystems, Communication Technologies and Geomatics. CTTC has contributed to more than 300 international 
journals and more than 600 international conferences. In addition, CTTC has currently submitted 17 patent 
applications and, among them, 9 have already been internationally patented and 1 has been awarded. 
The SMARTECH Department, part of the Communications Technologies Division (CTD), is led by Dr.Christos 
Verikoukis and involves research activities, both fundamental and experimental, focusing on technologies related 
to WSNs, WLANs and dense cellular networks. In particular, SMARTECH aims to provide advanced PHY layer 
solutions, cooperative network coding-assisted protocols, cognitive aware radio resource management schemes, 
network management protocols and power demand algorithms in order to improve the energy efficiency of the 
wireless technologies. Experimenta l activities include the development of a flexible platform for smart 
environments and a flexible tool for implementing advanced resource allocation schemes. 
Role in the project 
CTTC will lead WP9 ‘Dissemination, Communication and Capacity Building’, aiming to implement the 
dissemination of the project’s goals, software products, reports, results, achievements, and other outputs. In 
particular, CTTC will coordinate and supervise the dissemination of publications (of articles in scientific journals, 
peer-reviewed conferences, books) and white papers presenting 5G-SOLUTIONS’s intermediary results in various 
conferences and industrial/commercial exhibitions (e.g.  MWC, Global 5G events, ITS Congress, EuCNC) with 
the purpose of commercially exploiting 5G -SOLUTIONS results and identifying new partners for collaboration 
in the EU market. At the end of the  project, CTTC will organise the final project workshop gathering both local 
and international participants. Moreover, CTTC will be also responsible for the development of the communication 
plan ensuring at the same time the creation and continuous update of all web -based communication means. In 
addition CTTC will be involved in the Media & Entertainment Living L ab, designing novel caching techniques 
and machine-learning algorithms for network status prediction, dynamic slicing algorithms, uplink-oriented slicing 
schemes, innovative E2E dynamic inter-slicing algorithms and novel intra-slicing network schemes, capable of 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 115 
 
handling different content types. CTTC will also have an active participation in standardisation fora to disseminate 
5G-SOLUTIONS’ results. 
 
Therefore, CTCC will lead the following two tasks: 
• T9.1 Dissemination and communication activities 
• T9.4 Transferability and trainings 
Key Personnel 
Dr.Christos Verikoukis (Male) is a Fellow Researcher at Telecommunications Technological Centre of 
Catalonia (CTTC), the Head of the SMARTECH departmen t and an adjunct professor at Barcelona University 
(Electronics Department). He received his PhD from the Technical University of Catalonia (UPC) in 2000. He has 
published 118 journal papers (h-index 28) and over 180 conference papers. He is also a co-author in 3 books, 16 
chapters in different books and he has filled 3 patents so far. He has supervised 15 PhD students and five Post 
Docs researchers since 2004. Dr.Verikoukis has participated in more than 40 competitive projects while he has 
served as the Principal investigator in national projects in Greece and Spain. He served as the Technical Manager 
of the ITN -GREENET, the IT N-5GSTEPFWD, the CELTIC -GREEN-T and LOOP projects. Moreover, Dr. 
Verikoukis received the best paper award of the Communication QoS, Reliability & Modeling Symposium 
(CQRM) symposium in the IEEE ICC 2011 & ICC 2014 conference, of the Selected Areas in Commu nications 
Symposium in the IEEE GLOBECOM 2014 conference, of the EUCNC 2016 conference and the EURASIP 2013 
Best Paper Award for the Journal on Advances in Signal Processing. He was the general Chair of the 17th, 18th 
and 19th IEEE Workshop on Computer -Aided Modeling, Analysis and Design of Communication Links and 
Networks (CAMAD), and the TPC Co-Chair of the 15th IEEE International Conference on eHealth Networking, 
Application & Services (Healthcom) and the 7th IEEE Latincom conferences. He has also served as the symposium 
co-chair of the CQRM symposium in the IEEE ICC 2015 & 2016 conference.  He is currently the Chair of the 
IEEE ComSoc Technical Committee on Communication Systems Integration and Modeling (CSIM).  As the 
Dissemination and Communication Mana ger of 5G -SOLUTIONS Dr. Christos will lead WP9  
‘Dissemination, Communication and Capacity Building’  and also serve as the data privacy single point of 
contact of CTTC in the project. 
Dr. Angelos Antonopoulos (Male) is a Senior Researcher at CTTC. He received his PhD degree from the UPC 
in 2012. He has authored over 80 peer-reviewed publications (h-index: 19) on various topics, including 5G wireless 
communications, network virtualization, energy efficient network planning and network economics. He has 
participated in several national and European research projects (e.g., IoSense, GREENET ITN, etc.) and has served 
as an evaluator of research projects funded by the Romanian Government through the National Council for 
Scientific Research. He has received t he best paper award in IEEE GLOBECOM 2014, the best demo award in 
IEEE CAMAD 2014, the 1st prize in the IEEE ComSoc Student Competition (as a Mentor) and the EURACON 
best student paper award in EuCNC 2016. 
Dr. Jordi Serra (Male) is a Researcher at CTTC  since 2007. He received his PhD in electrical engineering in 
2016, from the UPC. From 2008 to 2010, he was awarded a Torres Quevedo Research Grant from the Spanish 
Ministry of Science and Innovation. He has actively participated in more than ten research proj ects funded by 
public and private entities. These dealt with MIMO applicability to satellite communications, channel modeling, 
multicarrier and spread spectrum communications for the power line, signal processing in 4G and 5G wireless 
networks, energy efficiency in smart grids, wireless sensor networks and Internet of Things. His current research 
interests include random matrix theory, high dimensional statistics, performance optimisation of large systems and 
its applications to signal processing, machine learning, wireless communications and Internet of Things. 
David Pubill (Male) is a Researcher at CTTC currently working at the Communication Technologies Division . 
He obtained his MSc degree in Telecommunications Engineering from UPC in July 2006. Prior to join CTTC, he 
worked at Centre de Telecomunicacions i Tecnologies de la Informació de la Generalitat de Catalunya (CTiTI) 
designing radiant systems for TV, radio, Wi-Fi and WiMAX. He also participated in the frequency planning and 
interference study on the se technologies for the Catalan radio spectrum. In August 2006, he joined CTTC as 
Research Engineer in the area of Access Technologies, where he worked in several national and international 
projects based on WiMAX. Later he joined the Engineering Unit group, where he specialised in ranging techniques 
for Wi-Fi systems and he collaborated in the implementation of an open source GNSS -SDR.receiver. His main 
research interests include smart grid, energy efficiency, smart metering, smart building/home, Internet of Things 
and Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN). He is the coordinator of the IoTWORLD testbed. He is involved in several 
national and European funded projects (SEMIoTICS, CONNECT, IoSense, etc.). 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 116 
 
Relevant Publications 
1. J.Serra, L.Sanabria, D.Pubill and Ch.Verikoukis, “Scalable and Flexible IoT data analytics: when Machine 
Learning meets SDN and Virtualization”, IEEE CAMAD2018. 
2. E.Datsika, A.Antonopoulos, D.Yuan, and Ch.Verikoukis “Matching Theory for Over -the-top Service 
Provision in 5G Networks”,  in IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 17, Issue 8, Pages 5452 
- 5464, Aug. 2018. DOI: 10.1109/TWC.2018.2844196. 
3. E.Datsika, A.Antonopoulos, N.Zorba, Ch.Verikoukis “Software Defined Network Service Chaining for OTT 
Service Providers in 5G Networks”  in IEEE Communications Magazine, Vol. 55, Issue 11, pp.124 -131, 
November 2017. 
4. M.Vincenzi, A.Antonopoulos, E.Kartsakli, J.Vardakas, L.Alonso and Ch.Verikoukis “Multitenant Slicing for 
Spectrum Management on the Road to 5G”, in IEEE Wireless Communications  Magazine, Vol. 24, Issue 5, 
pp. 118-125,  October 2017. 
5. G.Kalfas, J.Vardakas, L.Alonso, Ch.Verikoukis and N.Pleros “Non -saturation delay analysis of Medium 
Transparent MAC protocol for 5G 60GHz Fiber -Wireless towards 5G mmWave networks”, IEEE/OSA 
Journal of Lightwave Technology, Vol.15, Issue 18, pp.3945-3955, September 2017. 
Relevant Projects 
1. SEMIoTICS [EU]: ‘Smart End-to-end Massive IoT Interoperability, Connectivity and Security’ will develop 
a pattern-driven framework, built upon existing IoT platforms, to enable and guarantee secure and dependable 
actuation and semi-autonomic behaviour in IoT/IIoT applications. The SEMIoTICS framework will support 
cross-layer intelligent dynamic adaptation, including heterogeneous smart objects, networks and c louds. To 
address the complexity and scalability needs within horizontal and vertical domains, SEMIoTICS will develop 
and integrate smart programmable networking and semantic interoperability mechanisms. The above will be 
validated by industry, using three  diverse usage scenarios in the areas of renewable energy, healthcare, and 
smart sensing and will be offered through an open API. (1/1/2018-31/12/2020). 
2. IoSense [EU]: ‘Flexible FE/BE Sensor Pilot Line for the Internet of Everything’. The project’s goal is to boost 
the European competitiveness of Electronics Components and Systems (ECS) industries by increasing the 
pilot production capacity and improving Time -to-Market for innovative microelectronics, accomplished by 
establishing fully connected pilot lines in More than Moore (MtM) technologies. The new pilot lines will form 
a network with existing specialised R&D and manufacturing lines to work as a European modular solution 
system. In particular the segment of sensor technologies and MEMS, which pl ays a key role in solving the 
grand societal challenges, related to Smart Mobility, Society, Energy, Health and Production will be addressed. 
(1/5/2016-30/04/2019). 
3. CONNECT [EU]: ‘Innovative smart components, modules and appliances for a truly connected, efficient and 
secure smart grid ’. CONNECT will develop solutions for high interoperable, high data rate local and wide 
area communication in the power grid with enhanced security in order to protect this critical infrastructure 
against attacks. Particular e ffort is spen t to minimize the power consumption of the developed solutions.  
(1/4/2017-31/3/2020). 
4. 5GSTEP FWD [EU]: ‘5G System Technological Enhancements Provided by Fiber Wireless Deployments ’. 
5G STEP FWD will define the overall 5G network architecture, in both optical and wireless domains, by 
taking into account cross -layer and cross -system design requirements, while the UDWDM PON as the 
backhaul of mmWave cellular networks will be proposed as candidate solution for 5G networks.  (1/6/2017-
31/5/2021). 
Significant IT Infrastructure 
IoTWORLD® is the IoT part of the 5G platform that will be used in Barcelona. It is an End-to-End testbed for the 
Internet of Things (IoT). The main focus is on Wireless Communications systems and data analytics. IoTWORLD® 
is a unique testbed for the IoT. It features: 
• Scalable design 
• End-user involvement 
• Integration with 5G technologies 
• Heterogeneity of wireless technologies 
• Traffic shaping using SDN 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 117 
 
 
The most relevant capabilities of the testbed: 
• Applied research . IoTWORLD ® testbed facilitates experimental research  in the area of wireless 
communications and data analytics. IoTWORLD ® has been used to demonstrate the potential of the 
Distributed Queuing (DQ) technology. 
• Heterogeneous implementations. It allows several technologies to coexist and cooperate to achieve a 
common goal. 
• Commercial solutions integration . Thanks to its flexibility, IoTWORLD ® also allows the easy 
integration of off-the-shelf technologies. 
The architecture of the IoTWORLD ® testbed is the following. It relies on a 5 -tier architecture. Se nsors and 
actuators (IoT Device tier) are connected to a set of gateways (Gateway tier), either with a direct connection or via 
multiple hops. These gateways collect the data from the sensors and send it to the Edge Cluster tier where another 
set of more p owerful nodes process it. The Edge tier provides the testbed with Fog computing capabilities. For 
instance, reduce the congestion of the Core tier and the underlying nets, provide services with ultra -low latency, 
manage the different use cases that run over IoTWORLD® and incorporate flexibility and intelligence in the edge 
of the network. The Edge Cluster tier nodes are then connected to the Internet providing the capability to retrieve 
and store data in the Cloud (Core tier). Flexibility in the management of the edge net resources is provided through 
a Software Defined Network (SDN). This is complemented with Network Function Virtualization (NFV) to 
virtualize network services and hardware, thereby providing a more efficient use of net resources. Finally, the data 
gathered by the sensors is stored in the Cloud which can be accessed from a web interface or a smartphone 
application (User tier). 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 118 
 
IoTWORLD® permits to obtain valuable information from the data measurements by means of data analytics on 
the edge. For this purpose, Software -Defined Networking (SDN) is a key enabler to realize a flexible 
communication between the different computing entities. By leveraging the ability to gather network -wide 
information at a centralized SDN controller, IoTWORLD ®’s Gateway tier adapts the forwarding path according 
to each flow’s predefined requirements. This opens the door to context -aware forwarding strategies, revealing 
different network resources according to the type of 
flow and current network conditions. 
IoTWORLD® constitutes a fundamental part of the 
unique End -to-End 5G experimental platform 
available at CTTC. IoTWORLD® can be connected to 
other demonstrators devoted to the physical layer, 
optical networks, and wireless backhauling. Together, 
end-to-end research can be conducted towards a 
holistic definition and exploration of 5G technologies. 
IoTWORLD® can be used to demonstrate any use 
case. For instance: 
• Indoor air quality and gas monitoring 
• Smart energy grids: Distribution Automation 
(DA) and smart HVAC control 
• eHealth: Heart rate and oxygen saturation 
monitoring 
• Smart parking: presence detection 
• Water and waste management 
• Smart lighting 
• Intrusion detection systems 
• Remote robot control 
 
4.1.6 CYBERETHICS LAB SRLS 
Short name CEL 
 
Country Italy 
Type Small or Medium-size Enterprise 
Number of employees 5 
Website www.cyberethicslab.com  
Short Profile 
Cyberethics Lab Srls (CEL) is a start -up Italian SME leveraging on the experience and knowledge of its 
multidisciplinary core members, teaching at the University and working in numerous R&D activities in the context 
of inter -disciplinary EC Research projects. CEL’s main focus is a holistic vision of innovation, generated by 
efficiency, scientific curiosity and respect for human beings, where ideas, techniques, tools and methods from 
different disciplines are integrated to make innovative, secure and responsible technology. CEL ’s offering is 
mainly based on promoting innovation and new opportunities in the market as well as creating ethical awareness 
and promoting ethical behaviour to build confidence and trust, as well as the promotion of the inclusion of legal 
and ethical concerns i n the design and implementation of technologies, the identification of risks on individual 
fundamental rights and the issuing of recommendations in order to make technologies compliant with ethical 
principles and the current legal framework.  CEL has formul ated its own methodology on ethical, political and 
legal assessment, as a result of the knowledge acquired in several R&D projects.    
Role in the project 
In 5G-SOLUTIONS, CEL will contribute by supporting the Consortium during the project research and innovation 
process and the implementation of the final solution, in order to create a wide impact on the market, as well as 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 119 
 
ensure compliance with ethical principles and the current European legisl ation framework on privacy and data 
protection, with particular reference to the new General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). 
 
CEL will investigate, design and monitor all the procedures and protocols necessary for handling legal and ethical 
issues during the whole project lifetime. The 5G constitutes a formidable challenge from a legal and ethical point 
of view. Carme la Occhipinti (CEL) will also act as the 5G -SOLUTIONS’s Data Protection Officer ( DPO) and 
will collaborate with partners’ assigned data privacy single point of contacts, supporting them during the research 
process to comply with ethical principles and the legal framework on privacy as well as maintaining track of 
partners activity for what concern local authorities notifications and requests for authorisations when needed. CEL 
will lead T10.5 Legal and Ethics. 
  
Key personnel 
Carmela Occhipinti ( Female) is an independent Consultant working with CEL. She received  her degree in 
Political Science in July 1999 from the University of Rome “La Sapienza”, writing a thesis in International Law. 
She is Project Management Professional ( PMP), Information Technology Infrastructure Library (ITIL) Expert, 
PRojects IN Controlled Environments (PRINCE2) and SCRUM Master certificated. She is also a member of the 
Italian Chapter of the International Information Security System Certification Consortium. She worked for 24 
years in a big Italian Information Technology company, 16 of which in the Research and Innovation Laboratory. 
She has an extensive experience in different European research projects (e.g. ArchWare, BRIKS, I-DONTFALL, 
ADVISE, ABC4EU, PROMERC, PERSEUS, SAGRES, DANTE, SURVANT, etc.) in several fields (e.g. 
software engineerin g, cultural heritage, e -inclusion, security, etc.), undertaking various roles such as Project 
Coordinator, Technical Director, Innovation Manager, Dissemination Manager , as well as Ethical Manager. 
Carmela will undertake the Legal & Ethics Manager and DPO roles in 5G-SOLUTIONS.  
 
Dr.Antonio Carnevale (Male) is a Research fellow in Political Philosophy at the University of Scuola Superiore 
Sant’Anna in Pisa (SSSA), where he held different research positions from 2009 to 2016. He is mem ber of Lab 
Migrant Studies at the University of Chieti -Pescara (Italy). From 2012 until 2014 he was member and co -leader 
of the EU -funded project RoboLaw (Regulating Emerging Robotic Technologies in Europe), Robot -Era and 
responsible for the scientific act ivities of several Research Projects of National Interest (PRIN) funded by the 
Italian ministry MIUR. He is currently involved in the EU-project PERSONA. He was member of the International 
Research Laboratory on Conflict, Development and Global Politics at SSSA. He has published over 40 papers in 
international journals, books, and conferences. Peer-review for many reputed journals. He spent research periods 
at the Institut für Sozialforschung at J.W. Goethe -University in Frankfurt, and he was a visiting scholar at the 
Committee on Social Thought of the University of Chicago (2006). His fields of specialisation include modern 
and contemporary political philosophy, Hegel, Frankfurt School, social justice, shame, human enhancement, 
robotics and disabilities, ethics and emerging technologies. 
 
Maria Pia Verzillo (Female) obtained both her BSc (Sapienza University, Rome) and her MSc in “Performance 
Arts and Sciences” (Università degli Studi di Torino, Turin) and in “English and Polish Linguistics, Literature and 
Translation” (Sapienza University, Rome) with highest honours. After gaining some work experience in the field 
of teaching and translating, she focused on the cultural promotion and event organisation for EU projects and 
achieved with highest honours a Mast er’s degree in “Management of Cultural and Artistic Events” at Palazzo 
Spinelli, Florence where she studied, among other subjects, “European Project Management” and “Marketing”, 
with a special focus on the realization of a business plan. She recently worke d for art foundations and galleries, 
including the Foxy Production gallery in New York City and the MAXXI Museum of Contemporary Art in Rome, 
managing the exhibition production, including the business plan for the exposition’s artworks. Her scientific 
interests are mainly linked to the cultural promotion and the role of woman in the different cultural expressions. 
Relevant Publications 
1. Carnevale A., Tecno-vulnerabili. Per un’etica della sostenibilità tecnologica (Salerno: Orthotes, 2017) 
2. Carnevale A., I tech care’ approach. How healthcare robotics can change the future of our love, solidarity, and 
responsibility in: Hakli R., Seibt J. (eds) Sociality and Normativity for Robots. Studies in the Philosophy of 
Sociality (Berlin: Springer 2017), pp. 217-232 
3. Carnevale A., Will robots know us and the world better than we know ourselves and the things?, in: M. Decker 
and R. Dillmann (eds.), Next Generation Robots,  special issue of Robotics and Autonomous Systems, vol. 
86, (2016): pp. 144-151 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 120 
 
4. Occhipinti C., Fiorentino G., “Internet delle cose: esempi di applicazioni e nuove sfide (Introduzione; Esempi 
applicativi di alcuni progetti europei; Dall'Internet delle cose all'Internet di tutte le cose)”, in “Internet delle 
cose. Dati, sicurezza e reputazione”, Franco Angeli, 2017 
Relevant Projects 
1. PERSONA [EU]: ‘Privacy, ethical, regulatory and social no -gate crossing point solutions acceptance ’. A 
pivotal element of PERSONA project is to design and establish unified and tailored impact assessment method 
to appropriately assess the effects of new border-controlling technologies and ensure that these solutions meet 
the requirements and expectations of both governments, LEAs and border crossing individuals.  CEL is 
responsible for the Ethical, Legal and Social Impact Assessment of the research process and the technology 
implemented by the project. (01/09/2018 – 28/02/2021). http://persona-project.eecs.qmul.ac.uk/.  
2. RoboLaw [EU]: Regulating Emerging Robotic Technologies in Europe: Robotics facing Law and Ethics. The 
main objective of this project is to investigate the ways in which emerging technologies in the field of (bio)m 
robotics (e.g. bionics, neural interfaces and nanotechnologies) has  a bearing on the content, meaning and 
setting of hard versus soft law. In particular, the project will explore which regulation (both in terms of soft 
and hard law) may be affected by, and even in need of adjustment in light of, advances in robotics, with  a 
special focus on human enhancement. (01/03/2012 – 31/05/2014) http://www.robolaw.eu/.  
 
4.1.7 EBOS TECHNOLOGIES LIMITED 
Short Name EBOS 
 
Country Cyprus 
Type Small or Medium-size Enterprise 
Number of employees 24 
Website www.ebos.com.cy  
Short Profile 
EBOS Technologies L imited (EBOS) is an innovative and client -focused Information Technology (IT) SME 
software house with head offices in Cyprus and branch offices in Ireland and in the UK. EBOS is dedicated in 
providing comprehensive and cost-effective technologically-advanced e-business software solutions to enterprise 
customers worldwide. 
 
EBOS product portfolio provides a wide range of Windows and web -based customisable business solutions 
targeted for the enterprise market. EBOS core product offering, WiseBOS Enterprise Resource  Planning (ERP), 
is a state -of-the-art comprehensive software Suite, that offers complete, innovative, and proven solutions for 
enterprises of all sizes who want to thrive in the new digital era. WiseBOS ERP Suite is designed to adapt in 
flexible ways to t he ever-changing business needs of companies, unleashing the real potential of having fully 
integrated solutions that are fully-aligned with their business directives.  
 
EBOS is heavily investing in beyond the state -of-the-art technologies, thereby accelerating future digital 
innovation. EBOS Research & Development (R&D) division is focused on future -oriented research in a broad 
area of activities and domains, such as ICT,  wireless communication networks technologies and architectures 
including 5G, Next Generation Internet Technologies, Big Data analytics, IoT, Blockchain, Artificial Intelligence, 
Cybersecurity, Augmented & Virtual Reality and Intelligent Dashboards. EBOS l ong-term expertise and 
experience of 16+ years have been boosted though the company’s successful engagement in cutting-edge research 
projects funded primarily by the European Commission. In collaboration with large international research teams 
and industri al partners, EBOS has managed to become a highly respected and reliable partner and has made 
significant achievements at the frontier of ICT development, to drive industry development and business model 
success via technological breakthroughs.  
EBOS is a member of the NESSI (Networked European Software and Services Initiative), and NEM (New 
European Media), NetWorld 2020 (pending application approval) European Technology Platforms and NGI (Next 
Generation Internet) initiative and actively provides input to the EU Institutions on research actions and technology 
matters of particular importance to the software and interactive technologies domain. 
Role in the project 
In 5G -SOLUTIONS, EBOS will leverage its technical expertise in designing, developing, integr ating and 
deploying APIs and interfaces. EBOS will be heavily involved in WP3 Technological enablers for Living Labs  
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 121 
 
contributing in the design, development and deployment of the technological enablers, i.e. the KPI visualisation 
system and APIs for facili tating the execution of the field trials . In addition, EBOS will participate to WP9 
‘Dissemination, Communication and Capacity Building’  by designing, implementing and maintain ing the 
project’s website. Finally, l everaging more than 15 years of experience in successfully developing  and 
commercialising innovative software solutions as an IT company, as well as participating in EU-funded research 
projects, EBOS will undertake the role of Quality & Risk Management as part of WP10 ‘Project management’ 
with the responsibility of organising and supervising quality review/peer reviews for all deliverables including the 
implementation of the quality management plan. EBOS will be responsible for performing project quality 
evaluation criteria, risk assessme nt, continuous monitoring, triggering quality assurance project reviews, risk 
assessment procedures, evaluation measurements and producing risk and quality review reports.  
 
EBOS will lead the following tasks: 
• T3.3 APIs and interfaces design & development 
• T3.5 KPI visualisation system deployment as a Service in the cloud and LL driven improvements 
• T10.4 Quality Assurance and Risk Management 
Key Personnel 
Dr. Stelios Christofi (Male) is the founder and Director of the company. He holds a BSc degree with first class 
honours and an MPhil degree in Computer Science from the UMIST University (UK), and a PhD from City 
University (UK), where he has also published numerous research papers. He is a specialist in  web applications 
development, cybersecurity, cloud computing and private corporate security systems and technologies including 
dynamic systems integration. He has developed an innovative state -of-the-art software suite including the 
conception, design, de velopment and continuous evolution of the company’s innovative WiseBOS platform, 
which is used for rapid application development. He is also responsible for enriching and embedding in EBOS 
inhouse developed applications and solutions ‘security and privacy by design’ approaches making the products 
fully compliant with EU and national policy directives. He has more than 18 years of experience in these fields 
and he leads the company’s strategic and technological direction, business evolution and financial department.  He 
is also responsible for management decisions and for implementing the company's long and short -term strategic 
vision plans. 
 
Dr. Loizos Christofi (Male) is the R&D Director of the company, leading the way for the company’s innovation. 
He holds a BEng degree with first class honours, as well as MPhil and PhD degrees in Electrical Engineering and 
Electronics with specialisation in Digital Communications from UMIST University (UK). From 2001 -2017, he 
worked as a full-time senior telecommunications engineer at Cyta, the incumbent telecom operator of Cyprus. He 
is a specialist in the design, planning, development and evolution of Cyta’s fixed telecommunications networks, 
with a particular focus in networking technologies, such as softswitch, IP Multimedia Subsystem, Software 
Defined Networking, Network Functions Virtualisation, as well as in cybersecurity solutions. He has also been 
responsible for the Quality Assurance and Risk Management of the processes and procedures within the fixed 
telecommunications network department. He has been involved in numerous research projects and publications. 
He has an extensive experience and expertise in the fields of technical specification elaboration, tender evaluation, 
equipment procurement, strategic studi es elaboration, quality assurance, project coordination and management, 
successfully managing and leading Cyta’s fixed -mobile convergence and Class5 replacement project  
implementations. During 2004-2009 he has been, in parallel, a visiting lecturer in the computer science department 
at Frederick University Cyprus, delivering computer networking related lectures. He is a member of the Technical 
Chamber of Cyprus in the fields of Electronics and Computer Engineering. He has more than 20 years of 
experience in research and innovation projects. Loizos will serve as the Quality Assurance & Risk Manager of 
5G-SOLUTIONS. 
 
Gotelenne Piaton (Female) is the Program Manager of the company. She is a business development and project 
management expert with a wide range of  experience attained from working in demanding international 
environments in Paris, Brussels and Nicosia in the areas of public diplomacy, international development, 
marketing and IT. From 2012 to 2017, she held the position of Business Development and Qua lity Manager at 
Axiom Consulting, a loyalty marketing and IT solutions provider. From 2009 to 2011, she worked at the Permanent 
Representation of France to the EU where she was in charge of relations with EU think tanks and research centres. 
In 2008, she s erved as Internal Communications Executive for the industrial Group Thales in Paris. During her 
studies, she interned for the United Nations Development Programme and the European Commission in Cyprus. 
Gotelenne holds an MA in International Relations (2007) from the Institute of Political Studies of Lille, France, 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 122 
 
an MA in International Communication Strategies (2008) from the University of Dijon, France and is a certified 
Project Management Professional (PMP) from the Project Management Institute, United States, since 2016. 
 
Frini Lazarou (Female) is the Project Support Manager of the company. She holds a BSc degree with First Class 
Honors in Political Sciences and a minor degree in Gender Studies from the University of Cyprus since 2011. In 
2012, she was awarded a Master’s degree in Globalisation and Development from the University of Sheffield (UK) 
with Distinction. Frini is supporting project management and the quality assurance of the company’s R&D 
projects, ensuring the timely delivery of qualitative project deliverables.  Frini will serve as th e data privacy 
single point of contact of EBOS in 5G-SOLUTIONS. 
Relevant Projects 
1. ICONET [EU]: New ICT infrastructure and reference architecture to support Operations in future PI Logistics 
NETworks. ICONET will significantly extend state of the art research and development around the PI concept 
in pursuit of a new networked architecture for interconnected logistics hubs that combine with IoT capabilities 
and aiming towards commercial exploitation of results. (01/09/2018 – 28/02/2021). 
https://www.iconetproject.eu/.  
2. CHARIOT [EU]: Cognitive Heterogeneous Architecture for Industrial IoT. CHARIOT will provide a design 
method and cognitive computing platform supporting a unified approach towards Privacy, Security and Safety 
(PSS) of IoT Systems (1/1/2018 - 31/12/2020) http://www.chariotproject.eu/. 
3. CORE [EU]: Consistently Optimised Resilient Secure Global Supply -Chains. CORE aims to demonstrate 
how a powerful and innovative consistently optimised resilient ecosystem implementation, integrati ng 
interoperability, security, resilience and real -time optimisation can produce cost effective, fast and robust 
solutions that will guarantee the efficient and secure transit of goods throughout the worldwide global supply 
chain system (1/5/2014 – 30/4/2018) http://www.coreproject.eu/. 
4. SELIS [EU]: Towards a Shared European Logistics Intelligent Information Space (H2020). A recently funded 
H2020 project in transport and logistics to implement and support performanc e enhancing Environment -
friendly Logistics Strategies. (1/9/2016 – 31/8/2019) http://www.selisproject.eu/.  
 
4.1.8 ELLINIKI ETAIRIA TILEPIKOINONION KAI TILEMATIKON EFARMOGON AE 
Short name FNET 
 
Country Greece 
Type Industrial 
Number of employees 700 
Website www.forthnet.gr  
Short Profile 
Forthnet (FNET) is one of the largest alternative fixed operators that provide broadband and pay TV services in 
Greece with more than 1 million subscriptions. FNET  is active in the fields of telecommunications and PayTV 
and it is listed in the main market of the Athens Stock Exchange since 2000. Using state‐of‐the art technologies 
and fully exploiting its knowhow, FNET offers a set of individual or bundled fixed telephony, broadband internet 
and TV‐content services (primarily DTH and recently OTT), to customers, enterprises and Public Bodies 
throughout Greece. 
 
Currently, the company that brought internet, satellite TV and OTT services in Greece, has a chain of 132 shops 
in more than 60 cities all over the country. FNET is devoted to the development of pioneering solutions for the 
provision of integrated communication and entertainment services to the Greek family. It  utilises and integrates 
technological solutions on the basis of the latest telecommunications and transmission infrastructure in order to 
develop and provide new services on its network and beyond. In addition, FNET  has started providing OTT 
Content servi ces, targeting also mobile devices, aiming to strengthen its position by providing enhanced 
applications and services. 
 
FNET established its Innovation department in the Science & Technology Park of Crete having more than 15 years 
of experience in European projects, either as a Coordinator or a Contractor. The main interests of the department 
include OTT services, User Experience, Trust Enhancement, Connected Home Platforms, Internet of Things, Big 
Data Analysis, Broadband communications, Next‐Generation networks and E‐Content. 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 123 
 
Role in the project 
FNET will participate as an industrial end -user in the Media & Entertainment Living Lab field  trials and the 
respective evaluation process . FNET will lead T1.1 ‘Definition and detailed analysis of vertica l use 
cases/scenarios, baseline and corresponding target KPIs’ and T6.3 ‘Performance evaluation and lessons learned’.  
Key personnel 
Dr. Theodoros Mouroutis (Male)  is FNET’s IT Executive Director. He holds a Diploma of Electrical & 
Computer Engineering from the National Technical University of Athens, an MSc in Biomedical Engineering and 
a PhD in Electrical Engineering (Image Processing and Statistical Decision Support Systems), both from Imperial 
College in London, as well as an MBA (Distinction) from Warwick Business School. Since 1999, he has occupied 
various technical and managerial positions in the Telecommunications Sector. Prior to joining FNET, he was the 
Manager of Business & Technology Development of Cyta Hellas, a 4-play ISP, coordinating, among others, Cyta 
Hellas’ participation in EU research projects, both in FP7 and in Horizon 2020 in the fields of Smart Cities and 
5G Networks. Since 2007, he has been an evaluator of ICT Research Projects for the Greek Secretariat of Research 
and Technology. 
 
Dr. Ioannis Markopoulos (Male) is leading FNET’s Innovation & Project Management Department. He holds a 
PhD in Telecommunications from the National Technical University of Athens, Electrical Engineering 
Department. He is a National Technical University of Athens, Electrical Department Graduate and a member of 
the Technical Chamber of Greece. Since 2007, he is also PMP certified. He has been working and leading 
numerous European and Domestic R&D projects in the domain of broadband telecommunications, value added 
services, management, etc. He has also produced and participated in several publications. Moreover, he has 
participated in the Federation of Hellenic ICT Enterprises, pro moting frameworks capitalising on EU structural 
funds.. His research interests include: big data analytics, customer experience measurement methods, value added 
& OTT services, and customer loyalty & trust methods.  Ioannis will act as the data privacy single point of 
contact of FNET in 5G-SOLUTIONS. 
 
Dr. Emmanouil Chaniotakis (Male) is the Head of Engineering Dept. at FNET, having under his responsibility 
major projects relating to the design, development, optimi sation and new technology introdu ction for access, 
transmission, IP and voice networks of the company . He received his Diploma in Electrical and Computer 
Engineering and his Doctorate (PhD) in Telecommunications from the Electrical and Computer Engineering 
School of the National Technical  University of Athens in 1999 and 2003 respectively. From 1998 to 2004, he 
actively participated in many R&D EU funded projects mainly in 4th and 5th Framework Programs. From 2004, 
he has been employed in technology management positions in Greek Service Providers and he has participated in 
projects for Next -Generation telecommunications network and services development. His research i nterests 
include new technologies elaboration, assessment and application to commercial networks. 
 
Spyros Doukas (Male)  is cu rrently leading FNET’s Service Development & Reporting Department at retail 
marketing division. He holds an MBA from Athens University of Economics and Business and he is a graduate of 
Electrical Engineer from the University of Patras. He is a member of the Technical Chamber of Greece. He has 
over 14 years of experience in Telecom and Pay TV industries, from which 7 years in retail marketing. He 
specialises in customer base management (retention, loyalty, value increase) and product design / development. 
His interests include: customer base segmentation, customer experience management and OTT services. 
Software Products and Services 
FNET utilises and integrates technological solutions on the basis of the latest telecommunications and TV 
prototypes to develop and provide new services. It also utilises various software technologies. FNET’s Innovation 
department has completed its participation into several national and European research projects having delivered 
innovative prototypes of prod ucts and services, most of them related to the development and use of modern 
network technologies and content services. 
Data Centers and end to end infrastructure supporting telecom and media services 
Relevant Projects 
FNET utilises and integrates techno logical solutions on the basis of the latest telecommunications and TV 
prototypes to develop and provide new services. It also utilises various software technologies. F NET Innovation 
department has completed its participation into several national and European research projects having delivered 
innovative prototypes of products and services, most of them related to the development and use of modern 
network technologies and content services. 
Such projects are: 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 124 
 
1. COGNITUS [EU]: Converging broadcast and user generated content for interactive ultra -high definition 
services aimed at integrated user generated videos captured through wireless network during live event in the 
broadcasting process. (01/01/2016 – 31/12/2018). http://cognitus-h2020.eu/. 
2. SpeechXRAYS [EU]: Multi-channel biometrics combining acoustic and machine vision analysis of speech, 
lip movement and face.  The project aimed at authenticating subscribers using mobile devices with biometric 
means. (01/05/2015 – 30/04/2018). http://www.speechxrays.eu/. 
3. EU‐MESH project [EU]: Enhanced, Ubiquitous, and Dependable Broadband Access using MESH Networks 
where innovative wireless mesh infrastructure has been developed, tested and assessed. (01/01/2008 – 
30/09/2010). www.eu‐mesh.eu. 
4. MESH-WISE [EU]: Self-organising MESH Networking with Heterogeneous Wireless Access aimed at 
exchanging experiences with respect to mesh networks and OTT services. (01/03/2013 – 28/02/2017). 
Significant Infrastructure 
FNET is one of the largest alternative fixed operator that provides broadband and pay TV services in Greece with 
more 80 0000 unique subscriptions. The company operates significant infrastructure all over Greece. The list 
below is indicative: 
 
Technical assets  
Direct-to-Home (DTH) Satellite Broadcasting 
• 100% national coverage 
• Company currently leases 4 HotBird 13oE transponders from Eutelsat 
 
Over-The-Top (OTT) Network 
• Present in all Mobile devices with Live & VOD 
• Premium Content offering (sport and movies) 
• Forthnet CDN in all Major Cities 
 
Content Production 
• HD broadcast infrastructure  
• HD production studios, editing, graphics and recording facilities 
• HD multi-channel play-out, monitoring and continuing rooms 
• HD live coverage of sports events 
• Latest generation tapeless technology 
• OTT facilities to prepare content for Mobiles 
• VOD platform 
 
Transmission Facilities 
• Five digital Multiplexers with uplinks to HotBird Satellite. Earth Station Services. 
• DTH distribution to Greece and Cyprus 
• Optimised picture quality with latest MPEG, statistical multiplex technology 
• IP and MPEG-4 infrastructure 
• Irdeto conditional access 
• 24/7 monitoring and network management 
 
Other Technical assets 
• 5820 km fibre optic MAN, and WAN infrastructure 
• 471 physical and remote collocations to OTE’s (former National Telecom Provider) local exchange for 
providing LLU services, covering Athens, Thessaloniki and the majority of other cities & villages throughout the 
Greek territory 
• 94% of active customers are served from private network 
• 83% LLU coverage of total active local loops 
• 100% population coverage through SAT BB 
• ~10% of active loops can be served with own VDSL infrastructure 
• 140 Gbps international connectivity. Direct IP peering at Amsterdam, Frankfurt & Sofia exchanges & 
(AMSIX, DE-CIX, BIX) 
• 72 Gbps national connectivity 
• 90 Gbps CDN in Athens & Thessaloniki 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 125 
 
• 10 Data Centers all over Greece 
• Proprietary network allows high-speed broadband and telephony as well as further services in the future 
• HotBird 13o satellite coverage 
 
Content assets 
Forthnet-Nova operates a comprehensive multi-channel television service in Greece with: 
• 250+ channels 
• 14 Sport channels 
• Premium movies channels 
• 13 High Definition channels 
• First 3D channel in Greece 
• Total of 360.000+ hours of linear program per year 
• On demand premier movies 
• Hundreds of hours of live shows  
  
In particular Data Centre and related infrastructure and services will be used in the 5G-SOLUTIONS trials as well 
any other telecom or PayTV Forthnet asset is necessary for the successful implementation. 
 
4.1.9 ENEL X SRL 
Short name ENEL 
 
Country Italy 
Type Industrial 
Number of employees 287 
Website www.enelx.com   
Short Profile 
ENEL X SRL (ENEL) is a global business company in Rome, Italy leading the transformation of the energy sector. 
Shifting the paradigm, ENEL helps customers use technology to transform energy into new opportunities, so they 
can thrive and drive progress, across the world. ENEL as a global company with strong roots in the energy field 
and an open strategy geared towards digitalisation, sustainab ility and innovation is using smart, simple and fast 
technologies enabling customers discover new ways of using energy, all over the world. 
 
ENEL is a subsidiary fully owned by E NEL SpA. ENEL SpA is a multinational energy company and one of the 
world’s leading integrated electricity and gas operators. Enel SpA works in 37 countries across 5 continents, 
generating energy with a net installed capacity of almost 84 GW, selling gas and distributin g electricity across a 
network spanning approximately 2.1 million km. With around 64 million end users around the world, Enel SpA 
has the biggest customer base among our European competitors, and is one of Europe’s leading energy companies 
by installed capacity and reported EBITDA. Enel SpA’s portfolio of power stations is highly diversified, running 
on hydroelectric, wind, geothermal, solar, thermoelectric, nuclear and other renewable sources of power. Almost 
half of the energy generated by ENEL is produced with zero carbon dioxide emissions, making the group one of 
the leading producers of clean energy. The Enel Group is made up of nearly 70,000 people from around the world 
whose brilliant work is based on values of Responsibility, Innovation, Trust and Pr oactivity. Together all Enel 
Group employees are working on the same goal of “Open Power” in order to tackle some of the world’s greatest 
challenges. Within the strategy of opening electricity to new uses, towards the end of 2017 Enel SpA restructured 
its organisation creating Enel X, a subsidiary dedicated to non -commodity activities such as energy efficiency, 
demand response, smart cities, smart homes and electric mobility. 
 
ENEL is currently involved as subsidiary of Enel SpA into the development of H2020 and CEF funded programs 
such as EVA+ ‘Electric Vehicles Arteries in Italy and Austria’ co-financed by the European Union's Connecting 
Europe Facility. Prior to the involvement in Study with Pilots / Works Action related to EV charging infrastructure, 
ENEL developed its own portfolio of EV charging stations that allowed to execute design -to-cost activities to 
maximize the financial sustainability of the charging infrastructure investment and are currently outsourced to a 
EU-wide pool of manufacturing suppliers (for Normal and Fast charging stations). 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 126 
 
Role in the project 
In 5G-SOLUTIONS, ENEL will provide an i n-house Asset Management Platform capable of monitoring and 
controlling the status of the installed stations.  In addition, ENEL will d eploy Quick (22kW AC) and eventually 
Fast (50kW DC; 43kW AC) Recharge stations. A master station will contain a frequency regulation meter and a 
5G modem, while the rest will contain solely the 5 G modem. Eventually ELEN, will install and control a V2G 
station containing a 5G modem connected to the master station 5G modem. 
 
ENEL, as Italy’s largest energy producer and distributor, will design, develop  and deploy the technical solutions 
needed for the execution of the  Energy use cases UC2.2 ‘Electrical Vehicle Smart Charging ’ and UC2.3  
‘Electricity network frequency stability in the test site of Prato/L’Aquila ’. ENEL will be also responsible for the 
testing activities concerning the validation of the solution and performance evaluation. 
 
Key personnel 
Giovanni Coppola (Male) is a Program Manager at ENEL. Currently, he is employed in the E-Mobility Solutions 
Development unit of ENEL X Srl  (ENEL), within the E -Mobility division. His responsibilities include 
international program management within Smart Grids sector, including innovation partnerships and corporate 
venture capital processes management. He is involved in the technology strategy planning to unlock innovative 
business models at global level in order to secure new sources of value in the fast evolving framework of energy 
industry in mature and emergent markets. Before joining ENEL, he worked as a hardware engineer for ASIC 
development wi thin semiconductors industry, designing System -On-Chip products for energy efficiency and 
biomedical applications, developing hands-on know-how on leading edge technology development, prototyping 
and low-TTM process management. He authored several international technical and business papers on the subject 
of Smart Grids and has been accountable for demonstration phase of FP7 lighthouse project on electric mobility, 
Green eMotion. 
 
Fabrizio Gasbarri (Male) is responsible for Vehicle Grid Integration in the Global e-Mobility team within Enel 
X division of the Enel Group. Background in Energy engineering, he has 7 years of experience in the field of smart 
grids, RES integration and active demand. Enel X is a global business aiming to provide energy -related services 
to homes, businesses and Public Administrations. 
 
Clio Ceccotti (Female) is working in the Global e -Mobility team at ENEL. She is working in the Vehicle Grid 
Integration (VGI) team, which includes also Enel X’s V2G since 2017. Ms. Clio Ceccotti joined  ENEL in 2017 
after completing her MBA degree at Collège des Ingénieurs (Paris -Turin-Munich) focusing on Innovation and 
start-up projects. Clio has great expertise in managing Global Projects in Electrolux on environmental subjects, as 
well as, on renewable energies. She is also a holder of a masters on wind energy optimisation subjects in Norway.  
 
Dr.Carlos Boigues Muñoz (Male) is a Program Manager at ENEL. He holds a PhD in Energy Engineering and a 
Masters in Industrial Engineering. At ENEL, he is engaged in managing international funded projects in the Global 
e-Mobility team. He has seven years of experience in electrochemical energy storage and power generation 
technologies and RES integration. Before joining ENEL , he worked in the Italian National Agency for New 
Technologies, Energy and Sustainable Economic Development (Italy) and in VTT Technical Research Centre of 
Finland (Finland). 
 
Zopito Nobilio (Male) is the Data Protection Officer of ENEL and of all the Global Business Lines of the Enel 
Group. He is a g raduate of electronic engineering of the Milan Polytechnic University. He has a background in 
O&M of big power thermal generation plants, and also more than 15 years of experience in commercial operations 
regarding power and natural gas supply for the Italian Market. Zopito will serve as the data privacy single point 
of contact of ENEL in 5G-SOLUTIONS. 
 
Relevant Publications 
1. Cost/benefit assessment for large-scale smart grids projects: the case of smart grid project of common 
interest "GREEN-ME", CIRED International Conference 2015, June 15-18, 2015, Lyon. 
2. EVOLVDSO: new and evolving DSO role for efficient DRES integration in distribution networks, CIRED 
International Conference 2014. 
3. New ancillary services required to electrical storage systems for correct network planning and operation; 
CIRED International Conference 2015, June 15-18, 2015, Lyon, France. 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 127 
 
4. Smart info and Energy@home: the solution tool to address and assess customer participation to the energy 
market, CIRED, 2011.   
Relevant Projects 
1. Enel Info+ Project [Other]: Enel Info+ is a large-scale trial of the Enel smart info device that will involve a 
representative sample of families served by the Carpinone primary sub-station. The scope of the project is to 
demonstrate whether giving to end users a feedback on their energy consumption can addres s more efficient 
energy behaviours. The consumers participating to the project will thus receive an energy monitoring kit 
including Enel smart info and dedicated interfaces that they will use for one year to view how much electricity 
is currently being used in their household and to process their historical consumptions. 
2. FLEXICIENCY [EU]: ‘ energy services demonstrations of demand response, FLEXibility and energy 
effICIENCY based on metering data’. Four major Distribution System Operators (in Italy, France, Spain and 
Sweden) with smart metering infrastructure in place, associated with electricity retailers, aggregators, software 
providers, research organisations and one large consumer, propose five large -scale demonstrations to show 
that the deployment of novel services in the electricity retail markets (ranging from advanced monitoring to 
local energy control, and flexibility services) can be accelerated thanks to an open European Market Place for 
standardised interactions among all the electricity st akeholders, opening up the energy market also to new 
players at EU level. (01/02/2015 – 31/01/2019) http://www.flexiciency-h2020.eu/. 
3. WInSiC4AP [EU]: ‘Wide band gap Innovative SiC for Advanced Power’ aim is to contribute in developing 
reliable technology bricks for efficient and cost-effective applications addressing social challenges and market 
segments where Europe is a recognized global leader as well as automotive, avionics, railway and defence.  
(01/06/2017 – 31/05/2020).  
Significant Infrastructure 
Equipment 
− Five Quick Charge stations: charging stations for electric vehicles with up to 43kW in AC per station. In 
principle these stations will be installed in Enel’s facilities in Rome. 
 
 
4.1.10 GLANBIA INGREDIENTS IRELAND DESIGNATED ACTIVITY COMPANY 
Short name GLAN 
 
Country Ireland 
Type Industrial  
Number of employees 6.000 
Website https://www.glanbiaingredientsireland.com/  
Short Profile 
Glanbia Ingredients Ireland Designated Activity Company  (GLAN) is a global nutrition company, grounded in 
science and nature, dedicated to providing better nutrition for every step of life’s journey. Today’s consumers are 
becoming increasingly aware of the importance of nutrition in improving their overall health and wellbeing. They 
are searching for better, healthier and smarter nutritional solutions that fit their lifestyles. GLAN uses pure and 
fresh ingredients including milk, whey and grains, and with its expert knowledge and capabilities produces high-
quality nutritional ingredients and branded consumer products for customers and consumers worldwide.  
 
GLAN employs over 6,000 people across 32 countries and its products are sold or distributed in over 130 countries 
with an annual turnover of €3.6 billion. GLAN’s major production facilities are located in Ireland, the US, the UK, 
Germany and China. It has three segments: Glanbia Performance Nutrition (number one global performance 
nutrition brand portfolio); Glanbia Nutritionals (focused on both dairy and non-dairy nutritional ingredients); and, 
Joint Ventures & Associates (whereby it has three strategic Joint Ventures and Associates: Southwest Cheese in 
the US, Glanbia Cheese in the UK and Glanbia Ireland). GLAN’s shares are listed on the Irish and London Stock 
Exchanges (symbol: GLB). 
Role in the project 
GLAN will participate in the Factories of the Future  field trials. UC1.1 will be based on GLAN’s maintenance 
function. Typically, key assets and equipment are being maintained using scheduled and usage-based maintenance 
strategies. Predictive maintenance uses key data feeds and agents to constantly monitor condition feeds and 
recognise patterns leading to equipment failure allowing for timely and effective intervention. The key benefit is 
that assets can be sweated for longer and avoid unplanned outages. GLAN will also participate in UC1.3, whereby 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 128 
 
an Augmented Reality (AR) module will be developed by OMES, which displays a GLAN powder plant with 
current status. The AR module will use the Microsoft HoloLens and display plant operations using a 5G gateway 
data collection infrastructure for the purpose of overview and training on the plant. 
 
Key personnel 
Michael Power (Male)  is working as the Head of the MES group within GLAN  for the last 4 years. He is a 
Qualified Engineer working with GLAN for the past 15 years in various role positions such as IT specialist and 
Infrastructure specialist.  
 
Fergal Wall (Male)  is the Head of IT in GLAN.  He is an Agricultural Science graduate from the University 
College Dublin. He has been working in various roles for the IT group within GLAN for the past 12 years. Fergal 
is responsible for GLAN’s IT/OT strategy as well as managed services. 
 
‘Glanbia Ingredients Ireland Designated Activity Company will appoint, from project’s start, a data privacy single 
point of contact in its team, in view of ensuring all of GLANBIA project’s data processing activities, if any, are 
fully compliant with GDPR.’ 
Software Products and Services 
As a global performance nutrition and ingredients group with operations in 32 countries, GLAN occupies leading 
market positions in sports nutrition, cheese, dairy ingredients, speciality non -dairy ingredients, vitamin and 
mineral premixes. They are committed to innova tion and investment in the latest Key Enabling Technologies to 
drive quality, excellence and competitiveness. 
Significant Infrastrucure 
GLAN’s Ballyragget (Ireland) is the largest milk assembly site in Europe processing 1 ml gallons of milk per day 
at peak and comprising 5 plants which produce, cheese, powders, whey products and butter. 
 
4.1.11 IBM IRELAND LIMITED 
Short Name IBM 
 
Country Ireland 
Type Industrial 
Number of employees 3.500 in Ireland, 366.600 employees worldwide 
Website https://www.ibm.com/ie-en/  
Short Profile 
IBM Ireland (IBM) is one of IBM's major sites in Europe. The Ireland Software Group (Ireland Lab) is the largest 
middleware company in the world employing 1.700 employees across three cities in Ireland. This growth of over 
400% in 10 years is largely a result of its close collaborations with domestic and European academia, government 
and enterprise. IBM Irela nd Lab’s portfolio reflects the company’s strategy for developing Enterprise Software 
for Fortune 500 companies, MLCs and SMEs. This suite of technologies includes MaSS360, IBM’s Tivoli Suite, 
Social and Collaborative Mobile Computing, Smarter Cities, Clou d Computing, Service Management, Data 
Warehouse, Industry Models and Analytics.  
 
The Ireland Lab and the wider IBM ecosystem are involved in a range of open source initiatives and chair a number 
of standards groups. The Open source technologies that IBM has developed or co-developed include, to name just 
a few, Eclipse, Node -RED, UML & Unified Process, Java Community Process, Apache Foundation, Mozilla, 
DRAM, MIME and Dojo. IBM also has a dedicated global team contributing and participating to standards 
including Ireland Lab associations with (but not limited to) OASIS Web Services For Translation and XLIFF, 
Unicode Consortium, Java Server Faces, HRXML, OpenNTF leadership and CKEditor.  
 
The Ireland Lab Innovation Exchange (IIX) has an overarching remit that intersects with each of the teams in the 
Ireland lab where appropriate. The IIX leadership is responsible for managing the Ireland Lab’s participation in 
joint innovation frameworks including Horizon 2020, ESCEL, ITEA etc. Within Ireland the IIX has a 100% track 
record in competitive R&D competitions, largely owed to a history of demonstrating commercial impact through 
jobs and employment growth via its collaborations. Combined with this commercial impact the IIX also has an 
interest in the dissemination of its work through publications, open -source, conferences and peer -review. The 
underlying remit of the IIX team is to ensure the effective delivery of collaborative projects at the lab and provide 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 129 
 
to the external project participants, and the wider teams within the IBM worldwide, the right skills and 
competencies. Additionally, the IIX works in close collaboration with the Ireland Innovation Centre that manages 
Ireland’s participation in the IBM Global Entrepreneurial program (GEP). The GEP has approximate ly 10,000 
SME’s and recently established partners, circa 40% of which are based in Europe.  
 
IBM is a top organisation in the Cognitive Computing domain, leading with IBM Watson, which represents the 
first commercially available cognitive computing platform. IBM Watson became available through the cloud and 
represents a new era in computing powering new consumer and enter prise services in multiple domains, such as 
health-care, financial services, retail and education markets. IBM has also opened the Watson platform to 
developers and entrepreneurs, enabling them to build and bring their own cognitive applications to the mar ket. 
Recently, IBM has announced two new business units focusing on cognitive computing: Watson which is 
dedicated to developing and commercializing cloud -delivered cognitive computing technologies, and Watson 
Health which is aimed at doctors, researchers and insurers. Watson Health’s objective is to reveal new insights 
from the massive amount of personal health data being created daily in order to deliver personalized healthcare.  
 
IBM’s work in cognitive computing emerged as a major factor among the patents awarded to the company by the 
US. Patent and Trademark Office. More than 800 of IBM’s 7,355 2015 patents are related to cognitive computing, 
which represents a 52% increase from the previous year. This explains why IBM’s future focus should be on 
Cognitive Computing and also reveals how important this is for the organisation. In addition, IBM is now 
dedicating extensive resources to cognitive computing, as IBM leaders believe it will have a profound impact on 
business and society, by helping people to ma ke better decisions in their personal and professional lives, 
democratizing expertise, and transforming industries as well as professions. Last year, IBM announced that it has 
realigned its entire business strategy around cognitive computers, which can learn, reason, and efficiently process 
all diverse data types while interacting with people in natural and familiar ways.  
 
The IBM team has access to a number of skill sets across machine learning, analytics and research that can be 
applied to 5G -SOLUTIONS. IBM’s experience will be beneficial for the design and research of the various 
techniques. In particular, IBM will contribute with technical expertise in cognitive computing and machine 
learning. Bringing cognition closer to 5G and aiming for the automatio n of the network management solution is 
one of the main objectives of the team, with a proven record of contributions in multiple H2020 projects. 
Role in the project 
In 5G-SOLUTIONS, IBM’s primary role will be to lead the Smart Cities & Port Living Lab by doing research in 
the deployment and validation of machine learning systems for 5G use cases. IBM will collaborate with APPART, 
fusing the latter’s telco analytics platform with IBM’s Watson technology platform to reveal insights from large 
amounts of unstructured data  in order to facilitate the fast processing of the vast amount of data in the field.  In 
addition, IBM will be responsible for validating UC 3.4 ‘Smart buildings – Smart Campus’ for the analysis of the 
results relative to the baseline target KPI values. 
 
IBM will lead WP5 ‘Smart Urban Environment field trials’ , overseeing the validation of the use cases in the 
Smart Cities and IoT verticals, as well as the evaluation and lessons learned, thus leading the following tasks: 
• T5.3 LL3 execution: Smart Cities & Ports 
• T5.4 Performance evaluation and lessons learned 
Key Personnel 
Dr. Bora Caglayan (Male) is a data scientist and applied researcher at IBM Ireland Innovation Exchange. He has 
10 years of experience in machine learning and software engineering. Prior to joining IBM he spent one year as a 
post- doctoral researcher at Lero - the Irish Software Researc h Centre working on inner -sourcing and crowd -
sourcing metrics in software engineering with Lero industry partners. Bora spent two and a half years as a post - 
doctorate research fellow and instructor at Ryerson University Data Science Lab (DSL) in Toronto, ON, Canada. 
Bora worked on location based recommenders, app store recommender and news recommender projects at 
Blackberry and Globe & Mail using various distributed computing frameworks while working at DSL. Bora 
received his B.Sc., M.Sc., PhD degrees in Mechanical Engineering, Software Engineering and Computer Science 
respectively from Bogazici University, Istanbul, Turkey and his PhD dissertation was "An Issue Recommender 
Model using the Developer Collaboration Network” . Bora received full scholarship dur ing his PhD and worked 
as an ERP developer at Oracle Turkey for two years while pursuing his MSc. degree. Bora has more than 40 
publications on empirical software engineering, recommender systems in software engineering, software quality, 
location based recommenders and social learning in various high ranking journals and conferences including PLOS 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 130 
 
ONE, Journal of Systems and Software, IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, IEEE Software, International 
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) and Found ations of Software Engineering (FSE). Bora currently 
works in CogNet H2020 5G-PPP project and his focus is on network demand prediction. Bora will serve as IBM’s 
data privacy single point of contact in 5G-SOLUTIONS.  
 
Dr. Teodora Sandra Buda  (Female) is a Research Engineer in performance engineering and analytics within 
Innovation Exchange, IBM Ireland. She is also an Associate Faculty Lecturer at National College of Ireland, where 
she teaches Programming for Big Data for the Higher Diploma in Data Analytics. She is currently involved in the 
EU H2020 project called CogNet, which stands for Cognitive Networks, where she focuses on Machine Learning 
applied to 5G Network Management. She has published several research papers and presented her work at 
international conferences. Prior to joining IBM, she worked as a Big Data Engineer on the High Performance 
Computing Cluster at LexisNexis, Ireland. Her main interests are machine learning, performance engineering, 
resource management, distributed processing and big data analytics. Sandra received her Bachelor in Computer 
Engineering from the "Politehnica" University of Timisoara, Romania in July 2010, studying one semester at 
Universidad “Politécnica” de Madrid, Spain with the Erasmus scholarship. Upon finishing her Bachelor, she 
worked in industry for one year through AIESEC at an SME in Brasilia, Brazil. Following that, Sandra was granted 
a scholarship from University College Dublin (UCD) and IBM for pursuing a PhD. in Computer Science in the 
Performance Engineering  lab at UCD in 2011. She was awarded her PhD. in 2015, with her thesis entitled 
“Techniques for Scaling Relational Databases”.  
 
Dr. Mingming Liu (Male) is a data scientist and applied researcher within Innovation Exchange, IBM Ireland. 
He has many years of experience in machine learning, data science, as well as distributed control and optimisation 
theories with strong links to electric, hybrid vehicles and IoT in the context of smart grid, intelligent transportation 
systems and smart cities. Before joinin g IBM, he was employed as a postdoctoral researcher then a senior 
postdoctoral researcher with the control and decision science research group at University College Dublin, Ireland, 
where he spent almost three years working on both EU and SFI funded projec ts, including Green Transportation 
and Networks (SFI) and Enable -S3 (H2020). He is currently involved in the EU H2020 projects VI -DAS and 
Chariot at IBM, and his works mainly focus on leveraging the state -of-the-art machine learning techniques and 
optimisation solutions for practical and challenging problems arising in the industry.  Mingming received his 
B.Eng. degree with first class honours from the Dept. of Electronic Engineering at National University of Ireland 
Maynooth in 2011, and then the PhD. degree in Applied Mathematics from the Hamilton Institute at the same 
university in 2015 with his thesis entitled “Topics in Electromobility and Related Applications”. In addition, he is 
an IEEE member and an active reviewer in the fields. So far, he has p ublished over 20 papers, including top-tier 
journals such as “IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid”, “IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation System”, 
“IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering”, and “Automatica” with an overall impact fac tor 
greater than 35. Dr. Mingming will lead WP5 ‘Smart Urban Environment field trials’. 
 
Anna Carrigan (Female) Anna Carrigan is the Operations Programme Manager for the IBM Ireland Software 
Lab. Anna has direct responsibility for the management of a number of key programmes across the broader IBM 
Ireland Lab. With over 20 years’ experience in the IT industry she has fulfilled a variety of roles across a diverse 
range of computer science and engineering disciplines. Previous roles included analytical and technical software 
development, including data and process modelling. These roles lead to pre and post -scales on -site technical 
consulting activities at a number of high profile financial institutions in Europe. 
Relevant Publications 
1. Haytham Assem, Teodora Sandra Buda, Declan O’Sullivan. “RCMC: Recognizing Crowd Mobility Patterns 
in Cities based on Location Based So cial Networks Data”. ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and 
Technology (TIST), 2017. 
2. Haytham Assem et al. "Discovering New Socio-demographic Regional Patterns in Cities". LBSN Workshop, 
SIGSPATIAL 2016, ACM 9th International Conference on. ACM, 2016.  
3. Haytham Assem, Lei Xu, Teodora Sandra Buda, Declan O’Sullivan, “Machine Learning as a Service for 
enabling Internet of Things and People”, Personal and Ubiquitous Computing (PUC) Journal, Springer, 2016.  
4. Haytham Assem, Lei Xu, Teodora Sandra Buda, Declan O’Sullivan. "Spatio-Temporal Clustering Approach 
for Detecting Functional Regions in Cities". IEEE ICTAI 2016, San Jose, California. 
Software Products and Services 
1. IBM InfoSphere Streams: IBM Streams is an advanced analytic platform that allows user -developed 
applications to quickly ingest, analyze and correlate information as it arrives from thousands of data stream 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 131 
 
sources. The solution can handle very high data th roughput rates, up to millions of events or messages per 
second.  
2. IBM SPSS Modeler: IBM SPSS Modeler is a predictive analytics platform that is designed to bring predictive 
intelligence to decisions made by individuals, groups, systems and the enterprise. It provides a range of 
advanced algorithms and techniques, including text analytics, entity analytics, decision management and 
optimisation, to help you select the actions that result in better outcomes. Available in several editions, 
including a cloud -based version, SPSS Modeler can scale from desktop deployments to integration within 
operational systems.  
3. IBM Watson: IBM Watson is a technology platform that uses natural language processing and machine 
learning to reveal insights from large amounts of unstructured data. 
4. Apache Spark: Apache Spark is a fast and general engine for large -scale data processing which IBM team is 
very active in contributing and committing in it. 
Relevant Projects 
1. CogNet [5G-PPP Phase 1]: is a H2020 project which started in 2015 and which has the objective of 
developing solutions to provide a highly automated and more intelligent level of network monitoring and 
management, improve operational and energy efficiencies, quality of experience for the end user and 
facilitate the requirements of 5G. (01/07/2015 – 31/12/2017) http://www.cognet.5g-ppp.eu/. 
 
4.1.12 INLECOM GROUP 
Short Name ILS  
Country Belgium 
Type Small or Medium-size Enterprise  
Number of employees 19 
Website www.inlecom.eu  
Short Profile 
INLECOM is a European SME with offices and consultants in Belgium, Greece, UK, Ireland, Spain, and Italy. 
Originally established in 1996, with the seminal charter of promoting innovative Information Learning and 
Communication Solutions, INLECOM has since expanded upon these foundational competencies over the last 20 
years. INLECOM is now an established leader in Digital Ecosystem Platforms & Technologies.  
INLECOM Group (ILS) is the Brussels -based Research and Innovation Centre of I LS dedicated to advanced 
solutions. With an international team of experts in the areas of Mobility, Busi ness Consulting, Software 
Engineering Solutions and Business Analytics, ILS provides strategic knowledge-centric solutions to help private 
and public organisations use their unique capabilities to create or strengthen their competitive advantage. Core 
competencies include:  
• Management Consulting: Business Processes Improvement and Transformation, Organisation Excellence 
for Supply Chain, Risks Management, Governance, Compliance, New Business Models in Supply Chain, 
Innovation Management & Patent Filings.  
• Analytics and Integration : Business Analysis, Business Modelling, Key Performance Indicators and 
Analytics, B2B and B2G integration, Information Exchanges, Message Exchanges Standards, Port 
Community Systems, Single Windows.  
• Systems and Information Archite ctures: Public/Private/Hybrid Cloud Solution Architectures for Big Data 
and Internet of Things, including innovative business intelligence, big data analytics, data mining  and 
blockchain technologies. 
ILS is dedicated to research and innovation in the mobility, transport, cloud, and big data sectors covering policy, 
strategy, operational processes, and ICT. ILS has established a unique holistic view of the ICT domain through an 
extensive research programme including a library of process models, domain entities, ontologies and client-facing 
solutions. In addition, ILS has developed and applied blockchain expertise through projects and initiatives using 
this technology, while enhancing its capabilities in the area of data protection and privacy with an emphasi s on 
GDPR compliance. Currently, ILS is the coordinator of  four high profile H2020 projects, in the areas of IoT, 
Security, Big Data and Cloud technologies:  SELIS (www.selisproject.eu) and CHARIOT  
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 132 
 
(www.chariotproject.eu), Track and Know  (https://trackandknowproject.eu/) and ICONET  
(https://www.iconetproject.eu/), all directly aligned with the company’s strategy  
Role in the project 
With a long history in successfully participating in EU projects and seeing commercial outputs, I LS employees 
have collectively, and successfully, filed several hundreds of patents leading to commercial products, hence ILS 
will lead WP8 ‘Commercialisation activities, IP management and international networking’ assuming both the 
Innovation &IPR Management, as well as Commercial Manager roles for the consortium. ILS will therefore lead 
the following tasks:  
• T8.2 Business, marketing plan and sustainability 
• T8.4 Innovation, data management and IPR activities  
Key Personnel 
Dr.Patrick O’Sullivan (Male)  is the Director of Innovation and IT Solutions of ILS. He has led countless 
commercialisation projects and teams across Ireland, UK, USA, China, Japan, Israel, France, Korea, Germany and 
India over 28 years. Throughout his career Pat has demonstrated a passion for industry led innovation that has 
evidenced new commercial products, spinouts/spin-ins, and new client facing technologies deployed and used by 
hundreds of thousands of clients. He has filed over 500 patents, many of which have been filed in multiple 
countries, many in joint names with collaborating partners, and many of which have been successfully 
commercialised. He won both the Sm ith Testimonial Prize and the Mullins Medal at Engineers Ireland for 
commercially impacting research. Both of Pat’s MSc and PhD research degrees were IBM funded, won industry 
prizes in 1997 and 2001 respectively, and yielded technologies used and deployed across several of IBM’s world-
wide labs. Several of his patents have won industry awards for scientific innovation, advancement and excellence. 
He has played a key role in company acquisitions, and subsequent IP development/integration leading to new 
market leading product for Fortune 500 organisations. His own personal R&D interests have also led to numerous 
successful advancements, products, technologies, spin-ins and spin-outs. As an example, Logentries was a spin -
out company from a jointly funded Science Foundation Ireland project, the innovation in which Pat conceived and 
led at his lab over 3 years, and in 2015 Logentries was acquired by Rapid7 for $68m. After a 24 -year career at 
IBM (CTO) Pat joined Inlecom in 2017 as CTO & Director of Innovation, wit h an interest in supporting 
commercial outputs from EU Commission Funded R&D Projects across the SME sector. Today, Pat is assisting 
Inlecom in the project coordination and commercialisation of 4 large EU-Funded projects in IoT (CHARIOT), Big 
Data (Track & Know), Physical Internet (ICONET) and Interconnected Supply Chains (SELIS). In his spare time, 
he assists as an External Examiner, Adjunct Professor, Guest Speaker/Lecturer and Industry Advisory Board 
member for several Irish & European Universities, Industry partners, SMEs, Government & Research Bodies. He 
has a strong commercial and international profile, evidenced by 130+ written citations from senior Industry, 
Government and Academic leaders across USA, EMEA and APAC on his LinkedIn profile. He is frequently called 
upon to speak at conferences and events in Ireland and across Europe.  Pat will undertake the role of the 
Innovation & IPR Manager in 5G-SOLUTIONS and additionally lead WP8 ‘Commercialisation activities, 
IP management and international networking’.    
  
Patrick Durkin (Male) is the Commercial Director of ILS. He has led a range of commercial enterprises over an 
extensive career in enterprise technology. From an early career in software development in Boeing, he moved to 
software sales in global technology providers such as Teradata and Informix. In 1999, he was appointed country 
manager for SAS Institute in Ireland and over 7 years delivered consistent year-on-year growth and grew the Irish 
team to become a recognised leader  within their European operations.  In 2006, Patrick was recruited by VC 
investors as CEO of iQuate, and over the following 7 years, he led the company from a very early stage to become 
a recognised global leader in IT cost optimisation. Under Patrick’s lea dership, the company grew from zero to 
revenues of over 5 million euro, won numerous industry accolades such as Gartner’s Cool Vendor award, and 
received several lucrative acquisitions offers from larger global organisations.  Over recent years, Patrick has  
assisted a range of early stage technology companies with establishing and developing their business plans, raising 
external funding, and connecting them to early adopters for their solutions. As a part of the Enterprise Ireland 
Business Partner programme , Patrick has helped several academics and researchers from Irish institutions to 
identify the commercial applicability of their research, and support them with practical market validation in 
addition to securing initial funding for spinout ventures.  Patrick will undertake the role of the 
Commercialisation Manager in 5G-SOLUTIONS. 
Dr.Takis Katsoulakos (Male) is the Managing Director of ILS. He  holds a BSc, MSc and PhD in Marine 
Engineering from the University of Newcastle upon Tyne and since 1996 he is responsible for the development of 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 133 
 
the KBOS platform, EU projects and commercial contracts.  From September 1981 to December 1996 he was with 
Lloyds Register of Shipping in later years as Senior Principal Surveyor and Head of Applied Infor mation 
Engineering. At Lloyds, he was responsible for software development, software assessment services and research 
and development including about thirty Information Technology projects, many in maritime applications. He also 
served as Chairman of the B oard and Executive Committee of the European Software Institute (1994 -1997); 
Chairman of the Foundation of Enterprise Knowledge Development (1992-1994); Visiting Professor, Computing 
Science Dept University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology  (1995-1996); Chairman of many 
Software Engineering conferences including the IEEE Software Standards. He has published widely. In the last 4 
years he has been involved in the technical management of all the I LS projects. Takis brings an o verall 30-year 
experience in coordinating EU projects. 
Ioanna Fergadioti (Female)  currently holds the position of R&D Director at ILS, where she oversees and 
manages R&D and Innovation projects for Inlecom, and Inlecom’s partners and clients, with direct responsibility 
for KPIs that pertain to innovation, research outputs, PoCs, scientific excellence and scientific advancements. She 
holds a degree in Physics from Athens University, a Master’s degree in Information Technology & Management 
(National Technical University of Athens), and a Master’s degree in Educational Technology (Athens University). 
She has over 15 years’ experience as a consultant, specialising in the design and development of small, medium 
and large -scale information technology client-facing platforms and systems. Being involved in all phases of 
projects’ lifecycles, from inception and proposal writing to delivery management, part of her role is identifying 
the innovative elements of commercial and strategic value for businesses. She has a demonstrated hist ory of 
working in the information technology and services’ field. Throughout her career, she has participated in over 30 
national, European and international research and commercial projects, in the fields of Knowledge Management, 
e-learning, ICT, Transpor t & Logistics , etc. From 2003 to 2012 she held the position of Training Manager at 
Vocational Training SA and the National Institute of Labor and Human Resources, both operating under the 
supervision of the Hellenic Ministry of Employment. She has also wor ked for five years as a project manager in 
Software Houses and for three years as a Research Assistant at the University of Athens. Ioanna will serve as the 
data privacy single point of contact of ILS in 5G-SOLUTIONS. 
Dr.Vasileia Filidou (Female) is a Senior Research Scientist at ILS. She holds a BSc (Hons) degree in Physics, 
and an MSc degree in Photonics and Lasers from the University of Patras. She also has a DPhil in Quantum 
Technologies from the University of Oxford. Her research work has allowed her to publish peer reviewed papers 
in high impact -factor journals. Vasileia also carried out two PostDocs, at the University of Oxford, and at the 
London Centre for Nanotechnology, UCL. Her academic background was enriched by a Master in European 
Studies, Policy and EU project consulting at the Catholic University of Louvain and the Belgian-Italian Chamber 
of Commerce, in Brussels. Vasileia then worked at UCL as a European Proposal Management for UCL-led bids, 
at Thomson Reuters as a Proposal Coordinator for Academia Industry and Government, and has acquired an APMP 
certification in Strategic Proposals. She has managed and reviewed proposals on ICT, Biodiversity, Astrophysics, 
Transport, Climate, Mathematics Energy and others, and has coordinated bid-writing teams and consortia. She has 
a very good track record of successful bids for H2020. Before taking up her current role at Inlecom, she worked 
as a Business Development Manager for Scienomics, a materials and quantum chemistry modeling company, at 
the National Centre for Scientific Research, Demokritos in Athens. 
Georgia Tsiochantari (Female) is a Human Resources and Project Support Manager at ILS. She holds a BSc in 
Sociology from Panteion University of Social and Political Sciences in Greece, and an MSc in Occupational 
Psychology from Goldsmiths University of London. She started working at I LS in 2014. Since then, Georgia is 
responsible for project administration and has also worked in various projects with the commercialisation team in 
dissemination and exploitation planning tasks in projects such as SELIS (H2020), EuTravel (H2020), and EcoHubs 
(FP7). 
Relevant Projects 
1. CHARIOT [EU]: Cognitive Heterogeneous Architecture for Industrial IoT. CHARIOT will provide a design 
method and cognitive computing platform supporting a unified approach towards Privacy, Security and Safety 
(PSS) of IoT Systems (1/1/2018 - 31/12/2020) http://www.chariotproject.eu/. 
2. SELIS [EU]: Towards a Shared European Logistics Intelligent Information Space (H2020). A recently funded 
H2020 project in transport and logistics to implement and support performance enhancing Env ironment-
friendly Logistics Strategies. (1/9/2016 – 31/8/2019) http://www.selisproject.eu/.  
3. CORE [EU]: Consistently Optimised Resilient Secure Global Supply -Chains. CORE aims to demonstrate 
how a powerful and in novative consistently optimised resilient ecosystem implementation, integrating 
interoperability, security, resilience and real -time optimisation can produce cost effective, fast and robust 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 134 
 
solutions that will guarantee the efficient and secure transit of goods throughout the worldwide global supply 
chain system (1/5/2014 – 30/4/2018) http://www.coreproject.eu/. 
4. ICONET [EU]: New ICT infrastructure and reference architecture to support Operations in future PI Logistics 
NETworks. ICONET will significantly extend state of the art research and development around the PI concept 
in pursuit of a new networked architecture for interconnected logistics hubs that combine with IoT capabilities 
and aiming towards commercial exploitation of results. (01/09/2018 – 28/02/2021). 
https://www.iconetproject.eu/.  
5. Track and Know [EU]: ‘Big Data for Mobility Tracking & Knowledge Extraction in Urban Areas’, Big data 
PPP: research addressing main technology challenges of the data economy by introducing novel technologies 
and approaches in Big Data driven ecosystems (i.e. intelligent mobility services, autonomous, connected and 
shared vehicles technologies, healthcare and predictive maintenance, finance and insurance, etc.) (1/1/2018 – 
31/12/2020). https://trackandknowproject.eu/.  
 
4.1.13 INSTITUT FUR RUNDFUNKTECHNIK GMBH 
Short Name IRT 
 
Country Germany 
Type Small or Medium-size Enterprise 
Number of employees 134 
Website www.irt.de/en  
Short Profile 
Institut Fur Rundfunktechnik Gmbh (IRT) is an SME specialising in audio -visual media technologies. With 60 
years of experience, IRT is an internationally renowned research and competence centre for broadcast and media 
technology. IRT researches, observes and develops new technologies in the digital audiovisual media, always with 
the goal to strategically adjust the broadcast idea to new market environments and requirements. Founded in 1956, 
it is jointly owned by the Public Service Broadcasters of Germany, Austria and Switzerland (ARD, ZDF, DRadio, 
ORF and SRG/SSR). About 100 experienced engineers and researchers find innovative and real -world solutions 
which enhance the quality of radio, television and new media services. 
 
As a main motivation, IRT sees its role as that of a technical advisor to broadcasters, as well as a consulting body 
for industry. The institute collaborates internationally with numerous commercial companies, various research 
organisations and universities in the broadcasting, media, communications engineering and IT sectors.  
 
IRT is committed to preserving broadcasting in general, and public broadcasting in particular, in Europe and 
beyond. This commitment applies to new markets, upcoming technologies, emerging requirements and the move 
towards a data-driven economy in the media sector as well. IRT’s extensive experience enables it to provide its 
associates and other industry clients with reliable and knowledgeable services, by performing fundamental 
research, by developing new broadcasting/media technologies and by implementing feasible solutions for regular 
operation. To achieve its vision and to create open ecosystems also for 3rd party SMEs, IRT strongly favours open 
technical standards, interoperable APIs and horizontal system markets. Consequently, IRT is an active contributor 
to the relevant standardisation bodies and initiatives, including HbbTV which was co-founded by IRT, as well as 
ETSI, ITU and W3C. IRT is firmly involved in the technical work of the EBU (European Broadcasting Unio n) 
and is founding member of the European Technology Platform NEM (New European Media). IRT has substantial 
experience with national and international collaborative projects including H2020. 
 
Role in the project 
IRT’s primary role in 5G-SOLUTIONS will be to validate 5G infrastructures in the context of mass audio-visual 
media distribution by also extending IRT’s test facilities to align with the evolving 5G standards. Moreover, IRT, 
will provide and further evolve the QoE solution to enable systematic validation of 5G infrastructures for unicast 
content distribution. 
 
IRT will lead ‘T8.3 Standardisation’ using standardisation as a means to exploit the impacts of the project result 
and to most efficiently invest the public funding of this project. IRT will ensure that the research results produced 
by the project will be aligned with existing and emerging standards from the relevant standardisation bodies (e.g. 
3GPP, ETSI, ITU, IEEE, IETF, etc).  
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 135 
 
Key Personnel 
Dr. Khishigbayar Dushchuluun (Female) is the Head of IRT’s radio systems department. She completed her 
Masters in Radio Communications at the Technical University of Ulaanbaatar in Mongolia 1997, where she 
graduated with first class honours. In 1998, she continued her studies in the area of t elecommunications at the 
Technical University Darmstadt in Germany, where she was awarded a Doctoral Degree in Electrical Engineering 
in 2010. After her doctoral studies , she gained research experience at the University of Applied Sciences in 
Munich, where she developed technology for maintaining high reliability of public announcement systems. In 
2012, Khishigbayar joined IRT as a Senior Researcher working on Local Spectrum Portfolio Management and in 
particular, on frequency planning and web graphical too l of booking for PMSE and C -PMSE systems. Her main 
research interests lie in several fields of radio communications, including propagation, mobile radio system 
architecture, digital television, spectrum efficiency, frequency management and wireless microphones. She is now 
active in software defined radio implementation of LTE Transmitter Physical Layer according to 3GPP Release 
14. 
 
Aylin Vogl (Female) is working at IRT in the field of network technologies , since her graduation in 2008 . She 
studied media technology at the University of Applied Science in Du sseldorf with a focus on media informatics. 
Her main research area is on video encoding and streaming in order to ensure a wide-ranging reception of media 
content for the general public in the sense of the  German speaking public broadcasters. Between 2013 and 2016, 
she led IRT’s work within the EU project TV-RING. 
 
Sebastian Siepe (Male) joined IRT in 2012, focusing on the media streaming solutions for different platforms 
like Web, mobile devices or HbbTV and application development. He received his BEng. Degree in Audiovisual 
Media from the Hochschule der Medien Stuttgart.  During his time at IRT, Sebastian contributed to different 
collaborative research projects such as "Alert4All", "TV -Ring" or "Hbb4All". Currently he leads "Argos", a Big 
Data driven research project that enables broadcasters to monitor their video and audio delivery over the internet. 
 
Martin Schmalohr (Male) works at IRT in various European research projects like P2P-Next, kuMobile, Savant 
and Sambits, as well as , national and regional research projects like WiMAC@home or MifoP (Multimedia 
follows person) and ADAMs (Adaptive Multimodal streaming). He completed his studies in Electrical 
Engineering and Information Technology at Munich University of Applied Sciences (FH) in 2000 . Martin 
participates in international standardisation groups of EBU, DVB, DLNA and DASH. Since 2015, he is conducting 
MPEG-DASH Seminars at IRT. He is working with the public broadcasters of ARD and ZDF  for online 
distribution on PC, HbbTV and mobile devices over the open Internet. His working areas are interoperability and 
perceptual quality of audio and video -encoding as well as quality of experience in Adaptive Streaming systems 
for HbbTV, PC and mobile devices. He supports ARD, ZDF, ce-manufacturers and encoder-vendors in testing of 
av-profiles with the focus of multiplatform distribution using MPEG -DASH for Live and OnDemand over CDN 
infrastructures. 
 
Andreas Bosl (Male)  is IRT’s DPO. He studied Media Informatics at the University of Applied Sciences in 
Dusseldorf, Germany. He received his diploma in 2011 after having completed his thesis on “The comparison of 
adaptive streaming technologies” at the IRT. After his studies, he joined IRT as a Scientific Engineer. Among 
other things, he is currently focusing on the development of backend applications and involved in the EU H2020 
project ‘HRadio’. Since 2016, Andreas is responsible for all data protection questions concerning GDPR. Andreas 
will serve as IRT’s data privacy single point of contact in 5G-SOLUTIONS. 
 
Relevant Publications 
1. Siepe S.: “Argos: data security compliant quality checks of streaming offerings”, 27th FKTG Symposium 
2016, May 9 -11 2016, Leipzig, https://www.fktg.org/argos -datenschutzkonforme-qualitaetsueberpruefung-
von-streaming-angeboten 
2. Schmalohr M.: “One for all: One media library for all end user devices – Transport of multimedia and 
interoperable coding profiles within ARD”, Final presentation of ADAMS project, 03.Feb. 2014, Mun ich, 
https://www.irt.de/webarchiv/showdoc.php?z=NjY2OSMxMDA1MjE3I3BkZg 
3. Schmalohr M., Bosl A., Vogl A.: “IRT Adaptive-Streaming-Tests 2011”, IRT Technical Report B 206/2012, 
https://www.irt.de/webarchiv/showdoc.php?z=NTE3NyMxMDA2MDEwI3BkZg 
4. K. De Moor, S. Egger, C. Keimel, S. Möller, A. Raake, R. Schatz, and D. Strohmeier, “Definition of Quality 
and Definition of Experience,” in Qualinet White Paper on Definitions of Quality of Experience, European 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 136 
 
Network on Quality of Experience in Multimedia Systems and Services (COST Action IC 1003), P. Le Callet, 
S. Möller and A. Perkis, eds., Jun., 2013 
Relevant Projects 
1. 5G-Xcast [5G-PPP Phase 2]: ‘Broadcast and Multicast Communication Enablers for the Fifth-Generation of 
Wireless Systems’. The project will devise, assess and demonstrate large scale immersive media delivery by 
means of conceptually novel wireless technologies, contributing to the fur ther definition of 5G and its 
standardisation. 5G-Xcast will focus on large scale media distribution, as this use case is one of the most 
demanding requirements in terms of data rate (capacity), scalability (cost -effectiveness) and ubiquity 
(coverage). (01/06/2017 – 31/05/2019) http://5g-xcast.eu/. 
2. 5G-MEDIA [5G-PPP Phase 2]: ‘Programmable edge-to-cloud virtualization fabric for the 5G Media industry’ 
is a running project that aims at innovating media-related applications by investigating how these applications 
and underlying 5G networks should be coupled and interwork to the benefit of both: to ensure the applications 
allocate the resources they need to deliver high quality of experience and so that the network is not 
overwhelmed by media traffic. (01/06/2017 – 30/11/2019). http://www.5gmedia.eu/ 
3. 5G TODAY [Other]: coordinated by IRT, a running project to investigate and implement the 3GPP Rel.14 
specification for large-scale distribution of media content in a broadcast mode based on mobile technology.  
Significant Infrastructure 
− IRT possesses well-equipped labs and can easily set up an entire DVB -based broadcasting chain including a 
DVB-T/T2 wide -area testbed, playout servers, RF modulation, distributions and a plethora of receiving 
devices. 
− IRT possesses well -equipped IP production/studio infrastructures (network and end user equipment) to 
perform intensive tests on networked based production. 
− For measurements on networks there are state of the art devices for common use cases in IT and broadcast  
networks. The measurement setup for audio - and video signals supports all common formats and reference 
clocks which are used for acceptance tests in private and public broadcasters in Europe. 
− Opportunity to deploy Akamai CDN access for productive 24/7 liv e or VOD services and to evaluate new 
CDN features even as in beta phase 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 137 
 
4.1.14 IREN SPA 
Short Name IREN 
 
Country Italy 
Type Industrial 
Number of employees 6.420 
Website www.gruppoiren.it  
Short Profile 
IREN SPA (IREN), is one of the largest and most dynamic multi-utility companies in Italy with its main corporate 
offices in Reggio Emilia and its operating units in Genoa, Turin, Parma, Piacenza, Reggio Emilia, La Spezia and 
Vercelli. IREN  operates in the sectors of electricity (production, distribution and sale), thermal energy for district 
heating (production and sale), gas (regasification, distribution and sal e), the management of integrated water 
services, environmental services (collection and disposal of waste) and energy services. 
 
The Group serves a multiregional catchment area, has 6 .420 employees, a portfolio of around 1.7 million 
customers in the energy sector and about 2.6 million inhabitants served in the integrated water and 2 million in the 
waste cycles. It is the first operator in Italy in the district heating sector for the volume heated, third in the water 
services sector for the number of cubic metres managed and in the environmental services sector for the quantity 
of waste treated, fifth in the gas sector for the amount of gas sold to end customers and fifth in the electricity sector 
for the amount of electricity sold.  Moreover, IREN is an eco-friendly electricity producer for more than 85% of 
its production. 
 
Iren is structured as an industrial parent company with separate companies in charge of the individual business 
lines. IREN handles the strategic development, coordination and monitoring of activities, while the four subsidiary 
operating companies ensure the coordination and development of the business lines: 
− Iren Energia in the electricity and heat energy production sector and the technological services sector; 
− Iren Mercato as regards the sale of electricity, gas and district heating; 
− IRETI in the gas and electricity distribution business and in the integrated water service; 
Iren Ambiente in the waste collection, in the design and management of wast e treatment and disposal 
plants and in the renewable energies sector. 
 
IREN’s work will be partly implemented by IREN Energia, IREN Mercato, and IREN Rinnovabili, subsidiaries of 
IREN, which will be considered as linked third parties within the framework of 5G-SOLUTIONS. Further details 
are provided at Section 4.2 Third parties involved in the project (including use of third-party resources) at Section 
4.2. 
Role in the project 
IREN mainly participates in the Smart Energy Living Lab. In particular, IREN will be responsible for the design, 
development and deployment of technical solutions needed for the execution of UC2.1  ‘Industrial Demand Side 
Management’ and UC2.2 ‘Electrical Vehicle Smart Charging’ in the test site of Torino. IREN will also participate 
in the testing activities for validation of the technical solution and performance evaluation. 
 
Key Personnel 
Enrico Pochettino (Male) is the Head of the Internationalization & Innovation department in IREN SPA (IREN). 
He graduated in business administration and joined IREN in 2000.  He worked in the parent company IREN Spa 
as Head of Investor Relations and as Head of Mergers & Acquisitions dealing with extraordinary finance projects. 
He studied Economics and Commerce at the University of Turin. 
 
Federico Boni Castagnetti (Male) is an Engineer at the Internationalisation & Innovation department at IREN. 
He is currently leading IREN ’s team working in H2020 pro jects and regional funded projects.  Federico Boni is 
also an environmental engineer with more than four years of working experience in an international Power, Oil 
and Gas and Infrastructure EPC Company. In 2011 , he joined IREN as Technical Innovation Engin eer, working 
in the field of power plant and district heating design and business development (feasibility studies, FEEDs, 
proposals definition). 
 
Stefano Amelio (Male) is also an Internationalisation & Innovation Engineer at IREN. He holds a Master Degree 
in Energetic Engineering. He joined I REN in 2010 as a technical engineer working in the field of HVAC -R 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 138 
 
building systems design, district heating design and energy efficiency. He is currently involved in innovative 
project management and EU project development (FP7, HORIZON 2020, LIFE+). 
 
Angela Laus (Female)  is an Economist working in IREN’s Regulatory Affairs department, specialising in the 
energy sector. In 2015 she joined IREN to develop her master's degree thesis project about public services, energy 
markets and regulatory accounting; now she is 3 years experienced in several energy issues such as incentives for 
RES, promotion of cogeneration, energy efficiency, electric market and its developments. 
 
Viviana Persico (Female)  is also an  Economist working in IREN Regulatory Affairs D epartment focusing on 
electricity network. In 2003, she joined IREN to develop her master's degree thesis about the development of 
electric market in Italy.  After some years in Investor Relations D epartment, she started to work in the field of 
electric regulation, following all the sector s (production, distribution, metering, selling, energy efficiency, 
unbundling). From 2015 she focused on the European and Italian regulation about the activities – and opportunities 
- of electric DSO (distribution, metering, smart city, e -mobility), becoming an IREN representative to Italian 
Regulation Authority and other similar institutions. 
 
Claudia Gualtierotti (Female) is an Experienced Manager in the field Internal Audit a nd Compliance. She is 
currently “Compliance 231 & Privacy HoD” in IREN, managing all privacy issues and supporting the top 
management in all aspect related to the new GDPR legislation. Claudia will serve as IREN’s data privacy single 
point of contact in 5G-SOLUTIONS.  
Relevant Projects 
1. NeMo [EU]: ‘Hyper-Network for electroMobility ’. Electromobility is a major factor towards transport 
decarbonisation. However a number of challenges (limited charging options, lack of interoperability, absence 
of a unified identification/payment process, energy grid overload, expensive charging tariffs) limit the 
potential for interoperable and seamless electromobility services to a wider of actors and geographic area, 
hindering electromobility adoption. NeMo addresses all issues through a pan -European eRoaming Hyper -
Network that allows seamless and interoperable use of electromobility services throughout Europe. In addition 
it provides an Open Cloud Marketplace, where third parties can provide services (B2B2C) aiming to increase 
EV attractiveness. (01/10/2016 – 30/09/2019).  
2. FLEXMETER [EU]: ‘Flexible smart metering for multiple energy vectors with active prosumers ’ 
demonstration of a flexible smart metering architecture, based on cheap and already available components, 
that can be implemented in a plug and play way, combining metering of different services (electricity, water, 
gas, district heating), providing advanced services to  the users, to the DSOs and to the other utilities, and 
enhancing the possibilities of the retail market. (01/01/2015 – 31/12/2017). http://flexmeter.polito.it/.  
3. PLANET [EU]: ‘Planning and operational tools for optimising energy flows and synergies between energy 
networks’ aims to develop and provide a Decision Support System (PLANET DSS) to policy makers and 
network operators to help them facilitate the full integration of increasing intermittent renewable energy in the 
electricity grid. This will be possible through the global coordination of all energy (electricity, gas, heat) 
networks and assets, with special focus on energy storage and conversion techniques and assets. (01/11/2017 
– 31/10/2020).  
4. PUMP-HEAT [EU]: ‘Performance Untapped Modulation for Power and Heat via Energy Accumulation 
Technologies’ project aim is to develop and demonstrate up to TRL 6 in the relevant environment (a real 
Combined Cycle Cogenerative plant) an innovative, easily scalable, economically viable and replicable plant 
layout based on the integration of heat pumps (HP) and thermal energy storage, to un -tap Combined Cycle 
(CC) potential flexibility through low-CAPEX balance of plant innovations. The new Pump-Heat Combined 
Cycle (PHCC) will unlock the current situation of low operating-hours or mothballed (=temporarily suspended 
to operate) CC and Gas Turbine (GT) power plants. In fact, PUMP -HEAT will improve CCs flexibility and 
global efficiency, in order to strengthen their role in balancing fluctuations of electrical market with a high 
penetration of renewable sources (RES), while mitigating the effects of cyclic operation and service life 
expenditure, and reducing CO2 and pollutant emissions in these critical operating peri ods. (01/09/2017 – 
31/08/2020).  
Significant Infrastructure 
AS DSO, IREN (through its full subsidiary IRETI) manages the electric distribution in Turin and Parma cities. 
The plants managed in Turin are composed of: 
− 10 HV/MV transformation stations; 
− 1,224 MVA HV/MV power transformation; 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 139 
 
− 21 MV/MV substations; 
− 348 MV delivery substations; 
− 18 conversion substations for power tramways; 
− 3,206 MV/LV substations; 
− 1,109 MVA MV/LV installed power transformation; 
− 2,170 km of MV cables; 
− 2,493 km of LV cables; 
− 392 km of LV airlines; 
Turin network works at multiple voltage levels: 27 kV, 22 kV, 15 kV, 6.3 kV and 5.4 kV. 
 
The plants managed in Parma are composed of: 
− 5 HV/MV transformation stations; 
− 565 MVA HV/MV power transformation; 
− 140 MV delivery substations; 
− 1,126 MV/LV substations; 
− 355 MVA MV/LV installed power transformation; 
− 864 km of MV cables; 
− 1,583 km of LV cables; 
Parma network works at 15 kV. 
 
IREN, through its full subsidiary IREN Energia, also manages the public lighting infrastructures of Turin (58.031 
poles, almost 100.000 lights, 521 dedicated switchboards), Alba (in JV with EgeaAlba), Asti (through Asti Energia 
e Calore) and other 11 municipalities in the province of Biella. In Turin IREN also manages the street lighting 
infrastructure. These infrastructures could be useful for the rollout of 5G. 
 
4.1.15 IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS, SOCIEDAD LIMITADA  
Short Name IRIS 
 
Country Spain 
Type Small or Medium-size Enterprise 
Number of employees 70 
Website www.iris-eng.com  
Short Profile 
IRIS Technology Solutions, Sociedad Limitada (IRIS) is a technology SME established in Barcelona in 2007 
specialising in the manufacture and integration of a Process Analytical Technology (PAT) based in real -time 
quality monitoring solutions for the process industries and IoT systems for smart manufacturin g, predominantly 
targeted at the food, pharmaceutical and chemical industries. In particular, the product line comprises proprietary 
state-of-the-art IR analysers for at -line and in -line process monitoring. On the one hand, IRIS offers solutions 
based on the latest developments in photonics-in the fields of MEMs Near Infrared Spectroscopy, Hyperspectral 
Imaging, and Raman.  On the other hand, the company leverages ICTs, whereby it applies Machine learning, 
Artificial Intelligence and Data Mining techniques for predictive and active control, as well as for decision support 
systems. In addition to photonics-based analysers, IRIS also works with IoT sensors for enabling equipment and 
machinery for smart manufacturing and transitioning industry to the Industry4.0 paradigm also providing solutions 
such as cloud-based for mobility, remote monitoring and multi-site applications. IRIS is ISO 9001:2008 certified 
and one of the few Spanish companies having UNE-EN-ISO 166002: Management Systems R&D&I certification. 
IRIS is also certified by the local (Catalonian) government as a provider of technological R&D services (Tecnio 
Certification).  
IRIS has a great experience in working in collaborative R&D projects in H2020, both as a coordinator and a partner 
in the SPIRE, FoF , and BBI programmes. As a photonics and ICT -based solutions provider for the process 
industries, IRIS’ business is very much relevant to stakeholders, in that the future deployment of 5G will accelerate 
the Industry 4.0 revolution; whereby fundamental to Industry 4.0 is the implementation of a reliable 
communication layer capable of dealing with an increase in several orders of magnitude the number of assets, 
volume, and variety of information and reaction times in future manufacturing systems. As such, IRIS’ leadership 
of the Factories of the Future vertical LL in 5G-SOLUTIONS is a strategic decision having the capacity to perform 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 140 
 
well by understanding the industrial processing environments, and the development, manufacturing and integration 
of PAT-based solutions. 
Role in the project 
IRIS will be responsible for the f acilitation in the living lab case studies in terms of organisation, planning, and 
set up of the core communication network platforms in each test site for optimising the existing communicat ion 
network as appropriate (and any plant conditioning that this may entail), and building the interfaces between 
transceivers and sensors for wireless communication.  
IRIS will also integrate its hyperspectral imaging device to IRIS’s PATBox platform for processing the data 
obtained from the analyser and using a 5G testbed as the communication interface with the cloud.  Cloud-based 
supercomputing will allow using updated machine learning algorithms for improving the current capabilities –
mainly based on rather simple chemometric tools. It ultimately implies more comprehensive (accurate) 
identification and quantification to take artificial vision to a wider paradigm: chemical vision. 
 
IRIS will lead the Industry 4.0 field trials , overseeing the setup of the test environment performing the relevant 
planning and LL operational management for the Factories of the Future Living Lab. IRIS will also supervise the 
conducting of  advanced field trials in the Factories of the Future to validate the technological and business 
performance of 5G. Therefore, IRIS will lead the following tasks: 
• T4.1 LL planning, setup & operational management 
• T4.2 LL1 execution: Factories of the Future 
• T4.3 Performance evaluation and lessons learned 
• T7.2 MLL execution: Concurrent validation of eMBB, mMTC & URLLC service classes from LL1-LL4 
Key Personnel 
Georgios Chalkias (Male) is a Project Manager at IRIS. He obtained his Bachelor degree from the University of 
Ioannina (Greece) in Environmental and Natural Resource Management with a specialisation in Land Use and 
Master’s Degree from Universities of Leiden and Delft (the Nether lands) in Industrial Ecology. Having a solid 
background on environmental management as applied to industry, Georgios has worked for 10 years as an 
innovation researcher, consultant and manager developing great expertise in integrating principles of sustainability 
and circular economy with digital technologies (i.e. industry 4.0) as applied across a wide range of industries. 
Examples of topics and sectors include: Process Analytic Technologies (PAT) applied across the process industries 
and in high value manufacturing, Management of by-product exchange in industrial parks and clusters (industrial 
symbiosis), Cooperative business models for sustainable production and consumption of biogas, Sharing economy 
principles applied to public transport, Optical & ultra sonic Non -Destructive Testing (NDT) for predictive 
maintenance in various sectors, Corporate sustainability performance for responsible investments in various 
sectors. Georgios, is the project Coordinator of the SPIRE H2020 ProPat and Sharebox projects and  he will also 
coordinate the internal project for the IRIS team in the 5G -SOLUTIONS Project, as well as the FoF vertical LL.  
Georgios will lead WP4 ‘Industry 4.0 field trials’. 
Alejandro Rosales (Male) is a Science and Technology Manager with an MSc. in Physics from the Universidad 
de La Habana (1986). His background comprises theoretical and technical skills in several scientific and 
technological areas such as applied spectroscopy, chemometrics and design of measurement instruments. He has 
extensive pract ical experience in programming, electronics and mechanical CAD design as well as R&D 
methodology and management. During his professional career Alejandro worked as a researcher application 
engineer, design engineer, Business Developer, commercial and R&D Manager. In 2000s, he worked in the FTIR 
spectroscopy field applied to quality control in the wine industry. His career as an industrial physicist has been 
focused in applying his wide expertise to provide solutions for industrial problems. In addition, he has extensive 
knowledge in PAT, QbD, DoE and he has delivered numerous courses to industry in the field of practical PAT 
adoption. Alejandro also has great experience in leading the building of chemometrics and multivariate analysis 
modelling tools. In 5G -SOLUTIONS, he will be involved with the use cases in the FoF Vertical, as well as in 
elaborating and promoting whitepapers. Alejandro will occupy the role of the data privacy single point of contact 
in the consortium on behalf of IRIS, and he will engage w ith the Project Coordinators to ensure high ethical 
standards are met in relation to the work performed in our work and that the protection of personal data is ensured. 
Dr.Natasa Sarafijanovic - Djukic (Female) is a Senior Researcher in statistical modelli ng. She holds a Degree 
in Electrical Engineer in Telecommunications from the University of Belgrade in Serbia, and a PhD in 
Computer/Communication Sciences from EPFL, Switzerland. Natasa has a strong track record in data modelling 
applied to telecommunications networks and mobility. During her PhD studies, Natasa performed modelling of 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 141 
 
telecommunications network applications at the Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland and 
worked as a GSM Engineer for Ericsson telecommunications company, thu s obtaining both the academic and 
industrial know-how and experience in applying advanced data modelling techniques to real world problems. 
During that period of time, she also gained great experience and insight in the development and application of 
statistical models applied to the testing and development of human mobility, network routing and simulation. 
Dr. David Nettleton (Male) is a Senior Data Scientist with over 25 years of experience in IT system development, 
specialising in databases and data analysis. He obtained his Bachelor degree in Computer Science, his MSc degree 
in Computer Software and Systems Design and finally his PhD. in Artificial Intelligence. David has previously 
worked for IBM as a Business Intelligence Consultant, among other compan ies. In 1995, he founded his own 
consultancy dedicated to commercial data analysis projects, working in the Banking, Insurance, Media, Industry 
and Health Sectors. He has published over 40 articles and papers in journals, national and international congresses 
as well as magazines, and has also given many presentations in conferences and workshops. He is now a full-time 
data scientist working at IRIS. Prior to this, he has held positions as a contract researcher at the Universitat Pompeu 
Fabra, Barcelona, Spain and at the IIIA-CSIC, Spain, specialising in data mining applied to online social networks 
and data privacy. He is the author of numerous peer reviewed paper and books, such as David Nettleton (2014). 
Commercial Data Mining, 1st Edition. Processing, An alysis and Modeling for Predictive Analytics Projects. 
Commercial Data Mining, 1st Edition, ISBN9780124166028. Morgan Kaufmann. In 5G -SOLUTIONS, David 
will work on high level engagements with the Case studies in the FoF vertical. 
Dr. Idoia Marti Aluja (Female) is a Senior Scientist. She received her PhD in Chemistry from the Universitat 
Rovira i Virgili (Spain). Her thesis was focused on the establishment of novel analytical methods for the study of 
different processes by infrared spectroscopy and chemometr ics techniques. After her thesis, she expanded her 
expertise in spectroscopic techniques working as a Technician in the Spectroscopic and Kinetics Unit (SKU) at 
the Institut Català d'Investigació en Química (ICIQ, Spain). She was in charge of the calibration and maintenance 
of the instruments of the unit (UV -Vis, NIR, FTIR, FT -Raman, Circular Dichroism, Fluorescence spectra and 
polarimetry). Moreover, she worked as a PostDoct at the Institute of Photonic Sciences (ICFO, Spain), leading a 
project aiming to d evelop a new and novel infrared instrument based on a high -power laser source with direct 
emission in the mid- to long-wave infrared for chemical microspectroscopy of biological samples. She was using 
chemometrics techniques to extract meaningful information from the recorded data. She also worked as a Material 
Science Engineer at Zobele Spain, being in charge of the selection, testing and validation the most adequate raw 
materials, with particular focus on the interaction between chemical products (mainly perfumes, solvents and 
detergents) and materials. 
Oonagh Mc Nerney (Female) is IRIS’ Director. She holds a Degree in International Business (1992), University 
of Stirling, Scotland. Oonagh is an experienced female entrepreneur with strong leadership and co mmunication 
skills. She set up IRIS in 2007, with co-founder Colm Digby, with a vision to accelerate the transitioning of new 
technologies out of the lab and into industry. She is passionate about converting research and development into 
business. Over the years, she has been a fundamental driver in the evolution of IRIS towards the development of 
spectroscopy based on advanced monitoring solutions and in harnessing the power of process data to provide the 
industry with knowledge and intelligence. With a strong background in Business, she is enthusiastic about digital 
transformation as it drives productivity, competitiveness and growth through new business models. Prior to IRIS, 
Oonagh spent 15 years working in the innovation space, occupying various positio ns in the industry, technology 
institutes and Universities. She was also the representative for Malta Enterprise in Spain, leading numerous 
successful industry foreign direct investments from Spain to Malta. She is also co -founder and CEO of Sapenta 
(sapenta.com), an investor in a start -up in Finland (Timegate Instruments OY), which is developing a disruptive 
time-gated Raman Technology. 
 
IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS, SOCIEDAD LIMITADA  (IRIS) will appoint, from project’s start, a Data 
Privacy Single Point of Contact in its team, in view of ensuring all of IRIS project’s data processing activities, if 
any, are fully compliant with GDPR.’ 
Relevant Publications 
1. A.Rosales, O. Mc Nerney. Sensing Technology. Chapter 6. Resource Efficiency of Processing Plants. 
Monitoring and Improvement.  Edited by Stefan Krämer and Sebastian Engell. Wiley-Vch. Print ISBN: 978-
3-527-34074-3 in press. 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 142 
 
2. Commercial Data Mining, Processing, Analysis and Modeling  for Predictive Analytics Projects, David 
Nettleton, Elsiever book, ISBN9780124166028, 304p. 
3. Conference ICIEMPM 2016: Towards Automatic Calibration of In -Line Machine Processes, 18th 
International Conference on Industrial Engineering and Manufacturing Process Modeling, D.F. Nettleton, E. 
Bugnicourt, C. Wasiak, A. Rosales, London, UK, July 28-29, 2016.  
4. Recent Prospects in the Inline Monitoring of Nanocomposites and Nanocoatings by Optical Technologies, E. 
Bugnicourt, T. Kehoe, M. Latorre, C. Serrano, S. Philippe and M. Schmid, Nanomaterials 2016, Review, 6(8), 
150; doi:10.3390/nano6080150. 
5. Injection moulding process optimi sation by online material monitoring. E. Bugnicourt et al., October 2012. 
Technical article in Packaging connections.   
Relevant Projects 
1. ProPAT [EU]: ‘Robust and affordable process control technologies for improving standards and optimising 
industrial operations’. This project aims to develop novel sensors and analysers for providing measurements 
on composition, particle size and local bulk properties, as well as more traditional but smart sensors for 
measuring other process parameters, such as temperature, flowrate, pressure, etc., and integrate them into a 
versatile global control platform for data acquisition, data processing & mining and User Interface in order to 
measure properties of process streams and products, accurately and in real -time. IRIS is responsible for the 
Coordination and the development of PAT integration platform. (01/01/2015 – 31/12/2018) http://pro-pat.eu/. 
2. SUPREME [EU]: ‘Sustainable and flexible powder metallurgy processes optimisation by a holistic reduction 
of raw material resources and energy consumption ’. SUPREME aims at optimi sing powder metallurgy 
processes throughout the supply chain. It will focus on a combination of fast -growing industrial production 
routes and advanced ferrous and non-ferrous metals. IRIS will be scaling up the control platform. (01/09/2017 
– 31/08/2020). 
3. HYPERA [EU]: ‘Affordable Hyperspectral Imaging System for on-line foreign body detection and chemical 
composition analysis ’. In response to growing industry demand for rapid, non -destructive techniques for 
foreign body detection and identification in food p roducts, IRIS will accelerate the development of an 
affordable, rapid and accurate hyperspectral imaging (HSI) system for the on-line detection of foreign bodies 
and chemical composition analysis in modern food processing plants. (01/07/2016 – 30/06/2018)  
4. OPENMIND [EU]. “On-demand production of entirely customised minimally invasive medical devices”. 
IRIS is the developer of the data mining tools. (01/09/2015 – 31/08/2018) http://www.openmind-project.eu/ 
Significant IT Infrastructure 
In-house Hyperspectral imaging pilot facility.  
- Spectroscopic Laboratory equipped with several instruments, namely, an FTIR-ATR (Interspectrum), two 
UV-VIS (PerkinElmer and Ocean Optics), one Extended -SWIR (StellarNet) and one NIR (Mightex) 
spectrophotometers as well as SWIR Hyperspectral imagers (Specim -Xenics and Headwall Photonics). 
The associated staff are trained and skilled in chemometrics modelling by using a commercial suite 
(SOLO+MIA from Eigenvector) as well as ad hoc non-commercial chemometric tools (Matlab and Python 
toolboxes). 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 143 
 
4.1.16 LIVEU LTD 
Short Name LIVEU 
 
Country Israel  
Type Small or Medium-size Enterprise 
Number of employees ~100 
Website www.liveu.tv  
Short Profile 
LiveU Ltd (LIVEU) is a private company established in 2006 in Israel. It fully owns LiveU Inc., a USA subsidiary. 
LIVEU employs about 100 people, mostly engineers but also sales and customers support staff. It maintains offices 
in several countries, includ ing: Germany, UK, France, Russia, India, China and Hong Kong. LIVEU sets the 
standards for high -quality and reliable live video acquisition, management and distribution over IP. LIVEU’s 
award-winning technology enables live video transmission from any location around the world with lightweight, 
easy-to-use equipment. With top -tier customers in more than 70 countries, LIVEU’s solutions are being utilised 
to cover breaking and developing news and high -profile events, such as the FIFA World Cup™, Winter and 
Summer Olympic Games, Presidential Campaigns, Super Bowls, US Collegiate Championships and red -carpet 
events. Public safety and other government agencies have also been using LiveU bonding solutions. The solutions 
are being used from moving vehicles, trains,  undergrounds, drones, helicopters and near -shore ships, providing 
reliable high bandwidth bonded links for video uplink and bi-directional data delivery. LIVEU’s solutions include 
multiple 4G LTE/3G, HSPA cellular links, which are optimised for maximum video quality based on the available 
network conditions. L IVEU solutions can also bond WiFi, satellite links and fixed IP links. LIVEU has issued 
several core patents on bonding live video wireless transmission in the EU (validated in 14 European countries),  
Israel, USA and many more. The bonding products are basically SW and algorithms that take -in an audio/video 
feed from a camera, encode it, split the packets over the multiple connections available to it considering the 
momentary performance in each one of  them, to a remote IP at the customer premises or in the cloud where a 
LIVEU SW resides and reassemble the received packets into a comprehensible video stream output. Other 
products and technologies allow the delivery of live video over the public Internet , using standard ISPs, with no 
video quality loss and very minimal latency added. These are used to share live quality video between multiple 
sites and between agencies and affiliates. LIVEU core competencies are in video and data delivery, wireless 
networks including cellular, WiFi and satellite (SATCOM), using multiple connections bonded together for the 
video delivery. LIVEU’s expertise, achievements and reputation strongly correlate with the project’s overall vision 
and tasks and with the specific tasks  that LIVEU leads in it. LIVEU’s core ability to create a quality reliable 
broadband connection is a prime goal of the 5G KPIs. It is reflected in several verticals that the project intends to 
serve namely Media & Entertainment. 
Role in the project 
Deliver platforms for a mobile, reliable broadband over multiple relevant wireless links (multiple 5G connections, 
802.11p DSRC, satellite) for data and for professional grade video uplink.  These two platforms shall be used to 
demonstrate KPIs as well as for other partners to run their applications, using these links to communicate between 
the entities. 
 
LIVEU will lead WP6 ‘Enhanced User Experience field trials’, aiming to conduct advanced field trials in the 
vertical sectors of Media and Entertainment to validate the technological and business performance of 5G.  
Furthermore, as WP6 Leader, LIVEU will oversee all the undertaken efforts t o use the test results and data, in 
order to deliver impact analysis and impact assessment reports to sys tematically address the LL stakeholder 
perspectives. As a result, LIVEU will lead the following tasks: 
• T6.1 LL planning, setup and operational management 
• T6.2 LL4 execution: Media & Entertainment 
Key Personnel 
Rony Ohayon (Male) is LIVEU’s CTO and brings 20 years of technical and international marketing experience 
in the telecommunications and networking industry. Before joining LIVEU , Rony served as the CTO of 
Commatch, leading the definition of a new product line for triple -play networks. Prior to  that, Rony founded 
CleverNet which developed a session border controller for VoIP and served as a Director of product management 
at Tundo. Before that he was employed at ECI Transport Network Division (Enavis) as a Director of Marketing 
and Director of Product Management. Rony has a B.Sc. in Electronic Engineering, an MBA with distinction and 
a PhD. in Communication System Engineering from Ben -Gurion University. He held a Postdoctoral position at 
ENST (Telecom Paris) in the field of wireless mesh networks and served as a Lecturer at Ben -Gurion and Bar-
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 144 
 
Ilan Universities in the field of communication networks. He has published many papers in the areas of QoS, 
Traffic Management and Multimedia & Mobile Networking. 
 
Baruch Altman (Male) works as AVP in LIVEU’s CTO office, and has over 20 years of technical and business 
experience in the wireless and media industries. Before joining LIVEU’s office of the CTO, Baruch managed the 
product lines for LIVEU, and before that the R&D and delivery activities of the first LIVEU products and 
algorithms. Before joining LIVEU, Baruch served in several start-ups as R&D and Systems manager. Baruch was 
a SW engineer and a product manager in Motorola for 8 years. Baruch has a bachelor in Computer Science from 
Israel Technion. Baruch will be the Leader of WP6 ‘Enhanced User Experience field trials’. 
 
‘LIVEU LTD will appoint, from project’s start, a data privacy single point of contact  in its team, in view of 
ensuring all of LIVEU LTD project’s data processing activities, if any, are fully compliant with GDPR.’ 
Relevant Publications 
1. D. Grois, O. Hadar, R. Ohayon, N. Amram, “Ultra-Fast Live Video-in-Video Insertion for H.264/AVC”, ICCE 
2013, January 11-14, 2013 (Accepted). 
2. D. Grois, O. Hadar, R. Ohayon, N. Amram, “Live Video Streaming with Adaptive Pre -Processing for Using 
Scalable Video Coding”, ICCE 2013, January 11-14, 2013 (Accepted). 
3. B. Fu, N. Amram, Multimedia Transport for Mobile Video Applications, COMET-ENVISION workshop on 
Future Media Distribution Networks, Nov. 2011. LIVEU considers submission of new paper to conferences 
in 2012 (Presentation) 
4. R. Dubin, O. Hadar, R. Ohayon, N. Amram, “Progressive Download Video Rate Traffic Shaping Using TCP 
Window and Deep Packet Inspection” WORLDCOMP'12 July 2012 (Accepted) 
5. R. Ohayon, “Bonding 4G LTE/3G for HD Quality Live Video Transmission” NAB conference, Feb 2012 
(Accepted) 
Relevant Projects 
1. 5G-Xcast [5G-PPP Phase 2]: ‘Broadcast and Multicast Communication Enablers for the Fifth-Generation of 
Wireless Systems’. The project will devise, assess and demonstrate large scale immersive media delivery by 
means of conceptually novel wireless techn ologies, contributing to the further definition of 5G and its 
standardisation. 5G-Xcast will focus on large scale media distribution, as this use case is one of the most 
demanding requirements in terms of data rate (capacity), scalability (cost -effectiveness) and ubiquity 
(coverage). (01/06/2017 – 31/05/2019) http://5g-xcast.eu/. 
2. MARCH [Other]: MARCH addresses key issues for ubiquitous broadband access with a particular focus on 
service provision under the new broadband reality and network architecture effective for connecting all types 
of users, either fixed or on the move. The project aims at convergence of broadband, mobile, and broadcast 
approaches and its application to urban and rural deployment . (01/01/2008 – 01/09/2011) 
https://www.celticplus.eu/project-march/  
3. COMPEIT [EU]: ‘COnnected Media and Presence from European Institute of Technology ’. COMPEIT 
creates interactive, personalised, shared media experiences on the Internet for feeling more present when 
interacting remotely with other people and enjoying media together.  (01/10/2013 – 30/09/2016). 
http://www.compeit.eu/. 
4. NUBOMEDIA [EU]: ‘NUBOMEDIA: an elastic Platform as a Service (PaaS) cloud for interactive social 
multimedia’. NUBOMEDIA is an elastically scalable cloud infrastructure specifically devoted to the provision 
of real-time multimedia services. (01/02/2014 – 31/01/2017) http://www.nubomedia.eu/  
5. ENVISION [EU]: ‘Enriched Network -aware Video Services over Internet Overlay  Networks’ deals with 
collaboration between P2P overlay applications and network providers.  (01/01/2010 – 31/12/2012). 
http://www.envision-project.org/  
Significant Infrastructure 
LiveU bonding devices, such as LU600 or databridge. 
LiveU cloud-based or on-premise bonding gateways. 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 145 
 
4.1.17 L.M. ERICSSON LIMITED 
Short Name LMI  
Country Ireland 
Type Industrial 
Number of employees ~1.000 Ireland, 95.300 worldwide 
Website http://www.ericsson.com  
Short Profile 
Ericsson is a world-leading provider of telecommunications equipment and services to mobile and fixed network 
operators. Over 1.000 networks in more than 180 countries use their network equipment, and more than 40 percent 
of the world’s mobile traffic passes through Ericsson networks. Ericsson offers end-to-end solutions for all major 
mobile communication standards and the networks, telecom services and multimedia solutions make it easier for 
people, across the world, to communicate.  
 
L.M. Ericsson Limited  (LMI) is playing a key role using innovation to empower people, business and society, 
working towards a Networked Society, in which everyone and everything can benefit from a connection they have. 
The company is a strong leader in 5G.  Ericsson’s Network M anagement Lab in Ireland carrying out applied 
research, developing new and innovative strategic solutions and technologies for service and telecommunication 
management in existing and emerging networks. The Lab is involved in bringing new ideas and competence into 
Ericsson, with a focus on Ericsson’s network management products, including areas of research such as: Predictive 
Analytics, Service Assurance, Big Data Visualisation, Recommendation Systems, etc. utilising Machine Learning, 
Data & Stream Mining, Complex Event Processing, Recommender Systems and Advanced Visualisation, and 
Cloud technologies. LMI has over 150 publications in conferences, workshops, journals, books and patents, and 
have also been involved for more than 10 years in EU projects, such as Marie Curie Actions - supported Distorm, 
Eureka Celtic Madeira, Eureka Celtic Magneto, FP7 PRISTINE, H2020 ARCFIRE. Additionally, LMI is actively 
contributing to open source projects (e.g., Linux Foundation ONAP). 
Role in the project 
Based on this expertise, LMI plans to be involved in 5G -SOLUTIONS through innovating around these areas to 
support end -to-end deployment of the 5G services specified by the project. Specifically, LMI will lead WP1 
‘Requirements analysis, use cases and meth odologies’, overseeing the analysis of the challenges for 5G multi, 
concurrent and cross -domain orchestration and management . In addition, LMI will lead T1.2 ‘Analysis of 
challenges and requirements for 5G E2E multi, concurrent and cross -domain service man agement and 
orchestration including integration with ICT-17 facilities’ and T2.4 ‘Zero-touch automation mechanisms for 5G 
service lifecycle ’. LMI, will be also heavily involved in task T3.2 ‘KPI visualisation system components 
development, real-time collection and analysis of data feeds, and privacy aspects.  
Key Personnel 
Dr. Anne-Marie Bosneag (Female) has been working as a Senior Research Engineer in LMI for more than 10 
years. Prior to joining Ericsson/LMI in 2005, Anne-Marie received her PhD degree from Wayne State University, 
USA, in the area of peer -to-peer systems. Her current research interests a re in the area of Service and Network 
Management, with a focus on data analytics and machine learning techniques, in particular for 5G systems. Other 
research areas where Anne -Marie concentrated her work in the past have been distributed techniques for nex t-
generation communication networks, autonomic network management methods, peer-to-peer systems and network 
overlays. Anne-Marie worked as part of the EU Marie Curie action Distorm awarded to Ericsson Ireland and also 
in the European Celtic Telecommunicati on project Magneto. She is an active member of the community being 
involved as a chair to international conferences and workshops (IEEE Distributed Autonomous Network 
Management Systems DANMS, International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications  ICSNC, 
IEEE/IFIP Network of the Future, etc.), as well as a TPC member on several conferences and workshops and also 
a journal reviewer. Anne -Marie has authored numerous conference  and journal papers, as well as international 
patents, and she has also men tored and coordinated the work of KTH & EPFL MSc students while in Ericsson.  
Dr. Anne-Marie will lead WP1 ‘Requirements analysis, use cases and methodologies’.  
 
Dr. MingXue Wang (Male)  is currently a Technical Specialist in the area of big data analytic a nd machine 
learning for LMI . He  received his PhD from Dublin City University in 2011. He joined Ericsson’ Network 
Management Research Lab after his PhD. The core of his research is the application and design of statistical and 
machine learning based systems for network management related problems. He is a key contributor to a number 
of Ericsson’s OSS product features where data science and data engineering knowledge are both heavily involved. 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 146 
 
MingXue has also research contributions in business process management systems, service computing and cloud 
computing. He has served as a TPC member and reviewer for a number of international journals and conferences 
(IEEE Trans on Cloud Computing, Journal of Network and Systems Management, etc.), as well as a co-chair and 
track chair of international conference and workshop organisations (IEEE ECOWS, IEEE DANMS, etc.). 
MingXue has authored more than 30 peer reviewed publications and 10 international patents. 
 
Dr. Liam Fallon (Male) is a Principal Engineer at Ericsson's Network Management Product Development Unit. 
Liam is a network management practitioner with over 30 years of industrial experience in crafting software 
systems in that domain. He has specified, designed, and led the development of many of Ericsson's manage ment 
solutions and has wide experience in the software technologies required to deliver such systems. He is currently 
the lead engineer in Ericsson's Network Management lab. His primary research interest is in the automation of the 
management of highly dynamic networks to optimise the delivery of telecommunication services. He is the author 
of many patents and publications in the field of network management. 
 
Dr. Sven van der Meer (Male)  is currently a Master Engineer and team leader in the Ericsson Network 
Management Labs. He received his PhD in 2002 from the Technical University Berlin. Most of his current time is 
dedicated in designing and building advanced policy systems that can be used to direct the behaviour of complex 
event management systems. In the past, Sven has worked with Fraunhofer FOKUS, Technical University Berlin 
and the Telecommunication Software and Systems Group (TSSG) leading teams and projects, consulting partners 
and customers, and teaching on university level. He is actively involved in the IEEE CNOM community as 
standing member of programme committees (IFIP/IEEE IM, IEEE/IFIP NOMS amongst others) and in organising 
successful workshop series (IEEE MACE, IEEE MUCS, IEEE ManFed.Com amongst others). He also contributed 
to standardisation organisations, namely the OMG and the TM Forum. He has published more than 100 articles, 
conference proceedings, books, conference papers and technical reports. He has supervised and eval uated 6 PhD 
and more than 30 MSc students. Sven is currently coordinating the H2020 project ARCFIRE. 
 
Jimmy O’Meara ( Male) leads the Research Unit at the Ericsson Product Development Unit in Ireland  having 
more than 30 years’ experience in the Telecommunications Industry. He is also product owner of a new unit within 
the Systems organisation which has a focus to bring research ideas and new technologies to product. This unit is 
currently working on Research in Dynamic Policy Control and Machine Learning Technologies and has already 
delivered products in these areas. He has responsibility for research interfaces with University Bodies and 
Government agencies and is also Chairman of the Ericsson Patent Board in Ireland. Jimmy will serve as the data 
privacy single point of contact of LMI in 5G-SOLUTIONS.  
Relevant Publications 
1. Fallon L., Keeney J., van der Meer S., “Distributed Management Information Models”, 2017 IFIP/IEEE 
International Symposium on Integrated Networl Management (IM 2017), May 2017  
2. Bosneag A. -M., Handurukande S., Wang MX., “Fighting Fire with Fire: Survey of S trategies for 
Counteracting the Complexity of Future Networks Management”, 19th Conference on Innovations in Clouds, 
Internet and Networks (ICIN 2016), March 2016 
3. Bosneag A.-M., Handurukande S., O’Sullivan J., “Automatic discovery of sub-optimal radio performance in 
LTE RAN networks”, 2016 IEEE/IFIP Network Operations and Management Symposium (NOMS 2016), 
April 2016 
4. Zaman F., Hogan G., van der Meer S., Keeney J., Muntean G. M., “A Recommender System Architecture for 
Predictive Telecom Network Management”, IEEE ComMag (53:1), pp 286—293, IEEE, January, 2015 
5. Robitzsch S., Zaman F., van der Meer S., Keeney J. and Muntean G. M., “Magnet: Real -Time Trace Stream 
Analytics Framework for 5G Operations Support Systems”, IEEE Network, vol 31(5), pages 6-13, 2017 
Relevant Projects 
1. PRISTINE [EU]: ‘Programmability In RINA for European supremacy of virTualised Networks’ builts on a 
clean-slate approach to produce a future networking architecture which integrates communication, computing 
and storage resources in order  to support cloud computing, networked data processing and the limited 
resources of smart devices. LMI contributed to the design of architecture, investigated cross-layer management 
patterns, as well as real-world scenarios. (01/01/2014 – 31/10/2016). 
2. ARCFIRE [EU]: ‘Large-scale RINA benchmark on FIRE ’. This project brings RINA (Recursive 
InterNetwork Architecture) from labs into the real world, namely the FIRE+ testbed infrastructure. RINA is 
an innovative “back-to-basics” architecture that facilitates full integration between distributed computing and 
networking. RINA addresses the challenges that drive the move from specialised hardware to almost 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 147 
 
completely virtualized infrastructure. With the next shift to 5G happening now, ARCFIRE can prove 
experimental evidence of RINA’s benefits, at large scale, in compelling and realistic business cases.  
(01/01/2016 – 30/06/2018) http://ict-arcfire.eu/. 
Significant Infrastructure 
− Ericsson Ireland’s Athlone site is a dedicated R&D site for the development of telecommunication 
management systems, housing almost 1200 staff. The site was recently renovated - with the refurbishment 
ending in January 2013 - and it provides a world class quality working environment, in which international 
best practices for enabling collaborative research and innovation are met. There are dedicated areas for team 
meetings, quiet rooms, phone booths, 1 teleconferencing Polycom room and 3 VisualCom rooms, a large 
lecture theatre, as well as on site facilities such as restaurant, coffee /break out areas, etc. The open plan is 
conducive to ad-hoc type of interactions between researchers and increased communication. 
− LMI researchers have access to the latest technological infrastructure and software tools as needed to support 
their research work. Each researcher who will work on the YPSILON project will have full access to a high 
performance personal computer, mobile p hone, the communication and mobility tools needed, and software 
tools as it is normal for software-based research. 
 
 
4.1.18 NORGES TEKNISK-NATURVITENSKAPELIGE UNIVERSITET NTNU 
Short Name NTNU 
 
Country Norway 
Type Academic 
Number of employees 7.135 
Website www.ntnu.no   
Short Profile 
NTNU, the Norwegian University of Science and Technology, aims at creating knowledge for a better world and 
solutions that can change everyday life. NTNU is a university with an international focus, with headquarters in 
Trondheim and campuses in Ålesund and Gjøvik. NTNU has a main profile in science and technology, a variety 
of programmes of professional study, and great academic breadth that also includes the humanities, social sciences, 
economics, medicine, health sciences, educational science, architecture, entrepreneurship, art disciplines and 
artistic activities. NTNU has eight faculties, the University Museum and University Library, more than 40 0 00 
students and 7 ,100 full -time equivalent employees. NTNU is committed to innovative education, especially 
increased use of learning methods with active student involvement and digitization. NTNU has four strategic areas 
of research in 2014–2023: sustainability, energy, oceans, and health. The university is also the host or partner for 
35 large research centres. Some nine per cent of NTNU’s students are international and NTNU has a wide 
international network. NTNU has offices in Japan and Brussels (togethe r with the University of Bergen and 
SINTEF).   
 
The Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering (MTP)  is one of eight departments at the Faculty of 
Engineering Science. MTP has broad interdisciplinary expertise in the fields of logistics, machine design, product 
development, materials science and risk and reliability of complex systems. The research at the department focuses 
on development, optimisation and improvement of industrial processes and production systems. One of MTP’s 
goals is to secure t he Norwegian industry and administration with access to knowledge and expertise on an 
international level. 
 
NTNU main tasks revolve around industrial use cases for 5G communication. NTNU can provide systems at an 
industrial scale, descriptions of these, architectures and requirement specifications for these test facilities for live 
demonstrations with moving and stationary robots using closed -loop control over 5G infrastructure while in 
presence of industrial operations such as arc welding while intensive c ommunication between remote operation 
equipment and operators takes place concurrently. 
 
The Robotics/Industry 4.0 laboratories have 12 industrial robots from Kuka and Universal Robotics as well as 2 
AGVs on a designated area of 191 m2. 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 148 
 
Role in the project 
In collaboration with TNOR, the NTNU Manulab Robotics and Industry 4.0 laboratories will be equipped with a 
5G infrastructure for ultra-low latency closed-loop control of moving and stationary robots. The robots will also 
be monitored for remote operation by real-time audio/video-feeds requiring high data rates and throughput.  
 
NTNU will mainly participate in the Factories of the Future  to monitor new robots  in a factory for remote 
operation by real-time audio/video-feeds requiring high data rates , as well as in autonomous assets and logistics 
for Smart Ports in the smart urban environment filed trials.  
Key Personnel 
Dr. Amund Skavhaug (Male) is a full-time professor in embedded systems at the Department of Mechanical and 
Industrial Engineering (MTP) at NTNU since 2016. Leaving Sintef in 1998, he then worked as an associate 
professor on embedded and real -time systems at the department of cybernetics at NTNU. He was CEO/CTO in 
the companies Norsk Automatisering as and eMIP between 2009 - 2017. He has been part of / leading several 
projects for commercial ventures, the research council Norway, EU and ESA. His current main interests is 
feasibility, viability and enablement of Industry 4.0 concepts, especially related to remote operation, a utomatic 
configuration and safety.  He participates/has participated in several EU -projects, e.g. TACLE (timing -analysis 
from code-level), R5-Cop (robotics and embedded systems), Leanwind (remote presence in wind -generators at 
sea) and Destination Rail (mea surements and wireless transmission from rails and switches).  He has 
participated/led several national and regional projects with industry and academia, such as: NFR BIA EMIP 
(Remote Presence), NCEI “The Rosetta Tranceiver”, RFF-midt “Next Generation Intelligent Sensor Networks”. 
He participated, and later led, the StatoilHydro (sub) project on wireless communication in 2007-2008. Currently 
he leads the European Space Agency (ESA) project “ISSN – Intelligent Satellite and Sensor Network”. 
 
Dr. Stig Petersen (Male) is a Professor at Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering (MTP). He holds 
a PhD in Computer Science from the University of Antwerp from 2013. He has a main position as a senior scientist 
at SINTEF, a Norwegian research institute , and a part -time position as a professor at NTNU. His main field of 
research is industrial communication, with special focus on wireless communication and communication for 
safety-critical applications.  
 
Adam Leon Kleppe (Male) is a Senior Engineer at the Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering of 
NTNU. He holds a masters in Engineering Cybernetics with specialisation in robotics from NTNU. His research 
thesis deals with the Production of Mechatronic Products for the Automotive Industry whereas his research focuses 
on automatic assembly for the automotive industry.  Adam is using computer vision, force torque sensors and 
robotics to manage the assembly. Adam will serve as the data privacy single point of contact  for NTNU in 5G -
SOLUTIONS. 
 
Relevant Publications 
1. Petersen, S. and Carlsen, S., “WirelessHART vs. ISA100.11a: The Format War Hits the Factory Floor”, IEEE 
Industrial Electronics Magazine, Vol. 5, No. 4, Dec. 2011, pp. 23-34. 
2. Ikram, W., Petersen, S., Orten, P. and Thornhill, N., "Adaptive Multi -Channel Transmission Power Control 
for Industrial Wireless Instrumentation", IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, Vol. 10, No. 2, May 
2014, pp. 978-990. 
3. Zunino, C., Obermaisser, R. and Petersen, S., "Guest Editorial Special Section on Industrial Communication 
Technologies and Systems", IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, Vol. 14, No. 5, May 2018, pp. 2062-
2065. 
4. Skavhaug, Amund; Schoitsch, Erwin; Bitsch, Friedemann. Computer Safety, Reliability, a nd Security 35th 
International Conference, SAFECOMP 2016, Trondheim, Norway, September 21 -23, 2016, Proceedings. 
Springer 2016 (ISBN 978-3-319-45476-4); Volum 9922 2016. Lecture Notes in Computer Science(2016) 
5. J. Sramota and A. Skavhaug, "RailCheck: A WSN -Based System for Condition Monitoring of Railway 
Infrastructure," 2018 21st Euromicro Conference on Digital System Design (DSD), Prague, Czech Republic, 
2018, pp. 347-351. doi: 10.1109/DSD.2018.00067 
 
Relevant Projects 
1. SafeCOP [EU]: ‘ Safe Cooperating Cyber-Physical Systems using Wireless Communication ’. is a H2020 
ECSEL project. The project addresses the use of wireless communication technologies in collaborative safety 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 149 
 
applications such as road platooning, autonomous ships and mobile robots. (01/04/2016 – 31/03/2019). 
http://www.safecop.eu/. 
Significant Infrastructure 
Manulab is a Norwegian research infrastructure for manufacturing research. Sensors and cameras will connect all 
physical equipment at the four geographical locations in a industry 4.0 / Cyber -physical Manufacturing System 
(CPMS) to form one united virtual laboratory.  MANULAB will invest in equipment for additive manufacturing  
(a.k.a. 3D -printing), joining technologies, robotics, manufacturing of light weight parts, industry 4.0/CPMS 
including learning factories for social science research on the next generation operators and engineers. Effective 
laser welding of thick section steel, one-piece-flow adaptive and flexible automation, next generation aluminium 
pars manufacturing and high-quality additive manufacturing for mass custo misation are some of the capabilities 
of the equipment. The lab being built at MTP, NTNU focuses on automation through use of robotic production in 
the Robotics lab and integration in the Industry 4.0 lab. There are 12 -15 industrial robotic manipulators an d 2-3 
AGVs in the finalized labs. All equipment, also for communication, will be instrumented for accurate performance 
measurements. 
 
4.1.19 NUROGAMES GMBH 
Short Name NURO 
 
Country Germany 
Type Small or Medium-size Enterprise 
Number of employees 30 
Website www.nurogames.com  
Short Profile 
NUROGAMES GmbH (NURO) is an independent games development company, founded in early 2006  by 
practised experts of the games and media industry. Headquartered in Cologne Germany the company maintains 
representative offices in Barcelona and Berlin. Since April 2011, the Berlin -based lbxgames GmbH and lieblinx 
GmbH are a part of the company and form a strong strategic alliance.  
 
NURO covers a wide range of work experience, comprising high-skill development for mobile and cross-platform 
games, leisure applications being one of its main fields of activity. Another focus of the company is placed on the 
development of games for Xbox one (Kinect), Playstation 4, Playstation Vita, Nintendo 3DS, Nintendo DS and 
Nintendo Wii, Virtual Reality and Augmented Reality. Furthermore, NURO develops mobile games / applications 
and social games.  
 
The mobile division is specialising in the development, production and marketing of mobile applications for iOS 
and Android Smartphone and Tablet as well as contents, ranging from innovative applications like games, active 
screens, instant messaging etc. to pod-cast solutions. Currently, developments have been ordered for iPhone/iPad 
touch platforms and Android applications as application for other application stores as well (Windows 
Marketplace, Mac App Store, etc.). Further working fields include the development of web-based e-learning games 
and game-based e-learning evolutions as well as the realisation of online and browser games for an international 
market.  
 
By participating in multiple research projects on a national and international level, N URO ensures the long-term 
orientation and the knowledge of state -of-the art technologies. N URO’s team has many years of experience in 
research projects of the BMBF and the European Union. They include such projects as MaTHiSiS, PATHway. 
RAGE, 5GTANGO, SPIELBAR, MMOBG Development MEDIA.  
 
Role in the project 
In 5G -SOLUTIONS, NURO will contribute in the execution of  smart city use case s by providing relevant 
technology enablers (e.g. applications) and in particular leading the intelligent street lighting, smart parking and 
port safety use cases. NURO will also lead the market assessment and technology assessment in order to identify 
and verify that the use cases to be trialled are indeed the most relevant having the highest commercialisation 
interest and potential amongst the targeted vertical industries. NURO will coordinate and supervise the undertaking 
of the market survey assessment to understand the sectoral needs and opportunities for 5G-SOLUTIONS, with an 
initial focus on telecoms and SMEs. 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 150 
 
Key Personnel 
Jens Piesk (Male) is the CEO & Founder Nurogames GmbH (NURO). Jens studied computer science, electrical 
engineering and economics with focus on image processing, user interfaces and business computing in Paderborn, 
Seville and Edinburgh. He founded NURO in 2005. Until 2009 he was also the Managing Director of the Research 
Institute “Laboratory for Mixed Realities” (LMR) at the Media University KHM in Cologne which he co-founded 
in 1999. In his time as Managing Director of this research institute he w as working on various projects. His 
research interests and areas of expertise are human-machine multi-modal interactions, social, personalisation, user 
profiling, edutainment, authoring tools, computer games, mobile gaming, multi-user games, interactive television, 
eLearning and mobile learning, digital rights management (DRM) and production of mobile content (mobile 
applications, mobile games etc.) distribution and marketing of smartphone Applications.  
 
Dr. Holger Sprengel (Male) is the Co-Founder and Chairman of NURO. He studied economy and law. Dr.Holger 
is a Producing Supervisor of NURO. He also is supervisory board member of several media companies throughout 
Europe. Since 2005, he is in the supervisory board of the media fund Deutsche Zeichentrick, DZT in Berlin. Until 
2006 he was in the managing board of plan_b media AG, Cologne, that he co-founded in May 2000. Plan_b media 
ag was leading producer and distributor of media content, especially mobile games and online games with more 
than 40 (sometimes international) licenses (Star Wars, Muppet Show, Garfield, Werner etc.) until alienation to a 
German group. He was responsible for financing, distribution and license and partner management. In addition to 
his profound knowledge of media markets and media business models, he has recently worked as the project leader 
of various national and international research projects (EU, WPF7 / BMBF, BMWI). Dr. Holger will serve as the 
data privacy single point of contact of NURO in 5G-SOLUTIONS.  
 
Relevant Publications 
1. Stefan M. Grünvogel, Jens Piesk, Stephan Schwichtenberg & Gregor Büchel. (2002) AMOBA: A Database 
System for Annotating Captured Human Movements In Computer Animation 2002 (CA 2002), 19 -21 June 
2002, Geneva, Switzerland , pp. 98-102 , IEEE Computer Society  
2. Ruben Costa, Pedro Oliveira, Antonio Grilo, Ayla Schwarz UGent, Greet Cardon UGent, Ann DeSmet UGent, 
Josue Ferri, Jorge Domenech and Andrew Pomazanskyi, "SmartLife smart clothing gamification to promote 
energy-related behaviours among adolescents" (2018) IEEE Xplore.  
3. P. Makris, N. Efthymiopoulos, E. Varvarigos, V. Nikolopoulos, A. Pomazanskyi, B. Irmscher, K. Stefanov, 
K. Pancheva, “ Digitization  era for progressive electric utilities: A novel business model through an inter -
disciplinary S/W platform and open research challenges”, under review in IEEE Systems Journal, November 
2017.  
4. P. Makris, N. Efthymiopoulos, D. J. Vergados, E. Varvarigos, V. Nikolopoulos, J. Papagiannis, A. 
Pomazanskyi, B. Irmscher, K. Stefanov, K. Pancheva, A. Georgiev, “SOCIALENERGY: A Gaming and 
Social Network Platform for Evolving Energy Markets’ Operation and Educating Virtual Energy 
Communities”, under review in IEEE ENERGYCON 2018, Limassol, Cyprus, 3-7 June 2018.  
5. Moran, Kieran and Wei, Haolin and Monaghan , David and Woods, Catherine and O'Connor, Noel E. and 
Zarpalas, Dimitrios and Chatzitofis, Anargyros and Daras, Petros and Piesk, Jens and Pomazanskyi, Andrew 
(2016) A Demonstration of the PATHway System for Technology -enabled Exercise -based Cardiac 
Rehabilitation. In: Multimedia for personal health and health care – MMHealth 2016, 15 - 19 Oct. 2016, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. ISBN 978-1-4503-4518-7/16/10 
Relevant Projects 
1. MaTHiSiS [EU]: ‘Managing Affective -learning THrough Intelligent atoms and Smart InteractionS . 
Technologies for better human learning and teaching. The MaTHiSiS learning vision is to provide a product-
system for vocational training and mainstream education for both individuals with an intellectual disablity and 
non-diagnosed ones. This product -system consists of an integrated platform, along with a set of re -usable 
learning components (educational material, digital educational artefacts etc.), which will respond to the needs 
of a future educational framework, as drawn by the call, and provide capabilities for: i) adaptive learning, ii) 
automatic feedback, iii) automatic assessment of learner’s progress and behavioural state, iv) affective learning 
and v) game-based learning. (01/01/2016 – 31/12/2018). http://www.mathisis-project.eu/.  
2. RAGE [EU]: ‘Realising an Applied Gaming Eco -system’. RAGE will help to seize these opportunities by 
making available an i nteroperable set of advanced technology assets tuned to applied gaming. N URO will 
deliver a Serious Game based on reusable assets, targeting user data and pedagogically-informed strategic and 
social interventions. (01/02/2015 – 31/01/2019). http://www.rageproject.eu/.  
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 151 
 
3. PATHway [EU]: ‘ PATHway: Technology enabled behavioural change as a pathway towards better self -
management of CVD ’. PATHway proposes a radically novel approach to C ardiac Rehabilitation that will 
ensure a paradigm shift towards empowering patients to more effectively self -manage their Cardiovascular 
disease (CVD), set within a collaborative care context with health professionals. It has the potential to deliver 
significant cost savings t o the healthcare system, and direct more appropriate utilization of healthcare 
resources. This will be achieved via a patient -centric holistic approach that specifically addresses the above 
barriers. NURO creates an exergaming platform as well as an autono mous graphical avatar.  (01/02/2015 – 
30/09/2018). http://pathway2health.eu/.  
4. 5GTANGO [5G-PPP Phase 2]: ‘ 5G Development and validation platform for global industry -specific 
network services and Apps ’. 5GTANGO puts forth the flexible programmability of 5G networks with i) a 
NFV-enabled Service Development Kit (SDK), ii) a Store with advanced validation and verification 
mechanisms for VNFs/Network Services qualification (including 3rd party contributions) and iii) a m odular 
Service Platform in order to bridge the gap between business needs and network operational management 
systems. This end-to-end ecosystem for the agile development and deployment of services realises an extended 
NFV DevOps model between service devel opers, telecom operators and vertical industries, increasing 
operational efficiency, facilitating the implementation and validation of new services and accelerating the 
adoption of NFV technologies. 5GTANGO system is demonstrated in two vertical pilots: ad vanced 
Manufacturing and immersive Media. (01/06/2017 – 30/11/2019). https://5gtango.eu/.  
5. V4Design [EU]: ‘Visual and textual content re -purposing FOR (4) architecture, Design and video virtual 
reality games’. V4Design will develop a platform that provides architects, video game creators and designers 
of any expertise with innovative tools including VR tools necessary to enhance and simplify the creative phase 
of the designing process. The main idea behind V4Design is to reuse (i) visual: movies, documentaries 
paintings and images from other artwork and (ii) textual content: from textual documentations in films, critics, 
catalogues, museum guides, and re-purpose it in order in a way that will be useful for architecture and  video 
game designers. (01/01/2018 – 31/12/2020). https://v4design.eu/.  
Significant Infrastructure 
− For VR/AR development Nurogames owns: 
o VR developer’s kits (Google Cardboard, Oculus Rift v2, etc.) 
o Visual Studio  
o Unity/Unreal Engine  
o SVN 
− Other media equipment 
o Tracking and analytics engine  
o Server development engine for massive multiuser online applications. 
o Cross- platform client technology for 2D developments based on cocos2d-x (iOS, Android, 
 Windows 8, Windows Phone 8, Windows, Linux, Mac OS X, etc.) 
o Cross- platform client technology for 3D developments based on Unity3D (BlackBerry, 
Windows  
o Phone 8, Windows, OS X, Linux, Android, iOS, Unity Web Player (including Facebook), 
consoles, etc.) 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 152 
 
4.1.20 ORBIS MES 
Short Name OMES 
 
Country Ireland  
Type Small or Medium-size Enterprise 
Number of employees 20 
Website www.orbismes.com  
Short Profile 
Orbis MES Ltd. (OMES) is a software and systems integration company from Dublin, Ireland, established in 2011 
in order to provide Smart Manufacturing Execution Systems (MES) and Performance Management (SPM) 
Systems to the global food and beverage industry. The OPS™ Platform has been adopted by blue-chip customers 
including Diageo, Glanbia, Dean Foods and recently Dairy Farmers of America. Orbis OPS™ is a key solution 
for Manufacturing Operations and Performance Management (MOM/MI) and provides the data -hub to the 
enterprise, which is central to the evolution to Industrial Internet of Things (IIOT).  
 
In more detail, OPS™ provides manufacturers with the proven Operations and Performance Management 
functionality to effectively plan, schedule, execute, track, a nalyse, report and improve production processes. It 
also provides the plant with industrialised and robust platform for cross functional Performance Management from 
Realtime Plant Operations to Strategic and Global KPI’s. The Orbis OPS™ Solution for Smart Manufacturing 
provides process manufacturers with a powerful solution to Monitor Operations, to drive efficiencies and to 
produce sustainable, on-spec quality products. Furthermore, it enables the monitoring of performance from User 
Entry, Data Collection, Workflow, Data Analytics and Reporting to drive efficiencies according to a defined set 
of KPI’s.  
 
OMES are technological stakeholders in the Smart Manufacturing Space. They seek to be at the forefront of 
developments relating to 5G in order to enable their customers to harness the efficiencies and power of 5G through 
connected devices, services and collaborating functions across multiple sites. OMES believes that it can 
demonstrate 5G technology in action to its industrial partners Glanbia (GLAN), and va lidate the key 5G-PPP 
Network KPIs through the testing of multiple business scenarios within the Glanbia plant. Validating 5G 
technology in the Glanbia plant will reveal the efficiency they can gain through the adoption of 5G technology, 
especially for time-critical and not-time critical optimisation and communication within the digital factory.  
 
OMES is keen to facilitate this validation to demonstrate the power of 5G not only to the participant company, but 
also to its’ wider customer base. This validation will enable OMES to become a proponent of early 5G adoption, 
thus driving Factories of the Future within Europe. 
Role in the project 
OMES will be mainly involved in the Factories of the Future filed trials, and in particular in UC 1.1 and UC 1.2. 
In UC1.1, OMES with its client GLAN will enhance the operation of their Smart Manufacturing Execution 
Systems & Performance Management Systems, whereby the OPS Smart Manufacturing datahub – a centralised 
Hub for connectivity & data storage (for data input and extraction from various devices across the plant) – will be 
used for 5G validation to ensure efficiency, speed, capacity, latency, reliability, accuracy and timeliness in data 
input. In UC1.3, OMES will develop an AR module of a  GLAN powder plant to validate key KPIs through the 
testing of multiple business scenarios within the plant. 
Key Personnel 
John Tobin (Male) is the CEO and Founder of ORBIS MES (OMES) since 2011. Prior to this, John was a joint 
shareholder of Orbis Information Systems established in 1998, an SI company focusing on Lab and MES 
Manufacturing Software Systems. With over 25 years’ experience in the deployment of Performance Management 
systems in the Food and Beverage industries, John has extensive experience and knowledge in the area of Process 
Manufacturing. His experience includes the automation of production processes on SCADA systems, distributed 
control systems and the specification, design and implementation of corporate Pe rformance Management 
strategies. John is the driver behind the technology innovation within the company and is a leading proponent of 
Smart Manufacturing and analytics to drive efficiencies and create customer value.  As CEO, John is responsible 
for compan y’s strategic direction, overall governance and business performance, and expansion. He is also 
responsible for maintaining excellent relations with the partners. John regularly provides PM consultancy for Food 
and Beverage companies including Diageo, Glan bia, Baileys and Baxter. He is the leader of OMES initiative to 
develop the area of Smart Performance Management for Food and Beverages. He holds a degree in Mechanical 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 153 
 
Engineering from University College Dublin and he is a member of the Institute of Engin eers of Ireland. John 
participated in a number of international conferences for MESA, ISA, WBF, and Aspentech and co -authored 
various publications for industrial journals. 
 
Mary Williams (Female) is the Commercial and Sales Director of OMES. She has obtained a B.Ed degree from 
the University College Cork, and a BSc. in Financial Information Systems from Trinity College Dublin. Mary 
holds the position of Commercial Director within OMES since 2014.  Prior to this, Mary held several senior 
management positions in Ericsson Ireland, responsible for Strategic Sales, Key Account Management, Product 
Management and Business Development. Moreover, Mary had a global remit for telecom platform sales 
specifically at service level across multiple accounts. In her role as product manager she had responsibility for 
multiple product launches and strategic initiatives for fraud management and revenue management systems. Mary 
has responsibility in OMES for new client acquisition, portfolio expansion, new business ventures, and pipeline 
sourcing. 
 
Eunice Mc Carthy (Female)  is the Accounts Director of OMES. Eunice McCarthy has a strong technical 
background which enables her to define user requirements and to provide best practice Performance Management 
and Data Analysis consultation to OMES’ key customers. Eunice holds an Agricultural Engineering Degree from 
UCD and has been a Senior Manager and the Accounts Director of OMES since 2011 She is responsible for the 
Accounts Management, Support and Maintenance, Solution enhancement, Business Optimisation. Eunice is also 
dealing with the Brewing and Dairy Industry, specifically in relation to user management and user experience.  
 
Antonio Lampasi (Male)  is the Technical Manager of OMES. Antonio is responsible for product solution 
management, design and delivery. In addition, he is in charge of the design, testing and building of the quality and 
standards. He is also the Technology Solution architect and he is responsible for the implementation of the R&D 
Program. Antonio is a graduate of the University of Calabria. He holds a Master ’s Degree in Computer Science 
and is an acknowledged expert in the specification and design of Performance Management systems with a 
particular emphasis on ERP Integrations and Workflow. Antonio has over 10 years’ experience working with 
OMES. 
 
Dr.Andrzej Fima (Male) is a Software developer at OMES. Andrzej has a PhD in computational methods from 
the University of Krakow, in Poland. Andrzej is an expert on infrastructure, networking, cloud computing and 
computer systems hardware platforms. He has been working for OMES since 2012. 
 
Stephano Lucene (Male)  Stefano Lucene is a Graphics Designer at OMES and an expert in the design and 
building of User Interfaces. He graduated from the University of Calabria and has been working with OMES for 
4 years. Besides that, he is experienced at implementing client side Javascript for HTML 5 Clients. 
 
‘ORBIS MES will appoint, from project’s start, a data privacy single point of contact  in its team, in view of 
ensuring all of ORBIS OMES project’s data processing activities, if any, are fully compliant with GDPR.’ 
 
4.1.21 PANEPISTIMIO PATRON 
Short Name UoP 
 
Country Greece 
Type Academic 
Number of employees >1.000 
Website www.upatras.gr  
Short Profile 
The University of Patras (UoP) is the third largest university in Greece with each own campus in the outskirts of 
Patras city. The University of Patras includes 24 Departments, with a large number of sectors and consequently a 
great range of disciplines, which operate 161 laboratories and 17 fully equipped clinics.  UoP has 32,398 
Undergraduate and 3,781 Postgraduate students, a total of 633 faculty members, 191 Teaching and Technical staff 
and 357 Administrative Personnel. Besides its distinguished path in education, the UoP has excelled in the fields 
of Basic and Applied Research. The UoP has acquired international prominence for pioneering wide ranging 
Research in areas such as Environment, Health, Biotechnology, Mechanics, Electronics, Informatics and Basic 
Science. A number of the Departments, Laboratories and Clinics have been designated as Centres of Excellence, 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 154 
 
on the basis of International Assessment. The university has a reputation for quality and innovative research and 
presents an effective participation in a plethora of Research Projects, Scientific Organi sations, and Research 
Groups. 
 
The Network and Management Architecture Group (NAM), established in 2005, belongs to the Division of 
Telecommunications & Information Technology. NAM group has built its expertise in a number of scientific and 
technology areas as a result of international and national collaborations with industry and research projects, 
primarily European. The research activities of the group revolve around networking technologies and networked 
services and t heir application to various application domains. NAM group is currently carrying ou t important 
research in a number of key areas for the next generation internet, 5G/SDN/NFV H2020 Projects: 5G-VINNI [5G-
PPP Phase 3]: The 5G Verticals Innovation Infrastructure initiative. 
 
The Network Architectures and Management (NAM) group which represent the research aspect of the Greek 
cluster in this project acquired its expertise through collaborations with industry and a series of research national 
and European projec ts. It is currently comprised of two professors, four post-docs, two researchers-system 
developers and seven PhD students. During the last ten years , UoP has been involved in many Future Internet 
Research (FIRE) projects: Panlab-PII, OpenLab, FORGE and coordinated others like VITAL++ and STEER. We 
are also the technical leaders of 5GinFIRE project, which targets to enable experimentation on top of 5G resources 
and infrastructures. We are also maintainers of http://sence.city a service that engages citizens to report issues 
across their city and the ThingsNetwork IoT infrastructure/community in Patras. Finally, UoP has participated and 
successfully completed Proof of Concept #14 for the NFV ISG and performed two successful demonstrations in 
IETF’s 88 and 90. 
Role in the project 
UOP as part of the 5G -VINNI project, will implement one of the four 5G -VINNI facilities in the area of city of 
Patras in the Western Region of Greece . In this context,  UOP will host and provide operational support for 
multimedia use cases. It will also interconnect and interoperate with the 5G-VINNI Norway ICT-17 facility that 
will also host service components of similar use cases in order to support cross-domain communication scenarios 
and service deployments of verticals. In addition, UOP will provide and install: 
• Two new 5G RAN nodes which will act as 5G private networks to validate the stringent URLLC UC 
requirements within two factory locations, one in Ireland (GLAN) and the other in Brussels (PGBS); 
▪ One new 5G RAN node in IBM’s campus premises in Dublin-Ireland, whose traffic will be backhauled to 5G-
VINNI Patra ICT-17 facility.  
All RAN and core equipment provided by UOP will incrementally be upgraded to the latest 3GPP releases to allow 
the iterative testing and validation of the use cases to the latest available releases. 
Key Personnel 
Prof. Spyros Denazis  is an Associate Professor of the Electrical & Computer Engineering Department, in 
University of Patras, Greece. He received his B.Sc in Mathematics from the University of Ioannina, Greece, in 
1987, and his PhD in Computer Sc ience from the University of Bradford, UK, in 1993. In 1996, he joined the 
R&D Department of Intracom SA in Athens as Project Coordinator, and in 1998, he joined the Information 
Technology Laboratory of Hitachi Europe in Cambridge UK, as a Senior Research Engineer while serving for 3 
years (1998 -2001) as an Industrial Research Fellow in the Centre for Communications Systems Research, of 
Cambridge University, UK. For the period 2003-2010 he had also been a Consultant for the Hitachi Europe Sophia 
Antipolis Laboratory, in France; during this period, he has collaborated in a number of research projects both 
internal and European. Currently, Prof. Denazis leads a quite active research group, the Network Architecture & 
Management Group (NAM) where he coordinates a range of research activities in the areas of P2P Live Streaming, 
Future Internet Research Experimentation, 5G/NFV/SDN, Cybersecurity and IoT. The NAM Group has deployed 
and operates an IoT network (LoRa based) across the city of Patras which is also part  of the TheThingsNetwork 
community (https://www.thethingsnetwork.org/community/patras/). He has published over 70 papers in journals 
and conferences, and served as chair and member of a large number of conferences and workshops. He is the 
owner of one patent and he has contributed to various standardisation bodies, IETF, IEEE and ETSI. He has been 
involved in many EU projects since 1996 acting also as Project Coordinator. He currently serves as the Technical 
Coordinator of the H2020 project 5GinFIRE (https: //5ginfire.eu/). He has also served as a reviewer in European 
and national projects. He is one of the authors of the book “Programmable Networks for IP Service Deployment 
“, Artech House, and the owner of one patent. He and his NAM team received in 2016, the 3rdPanhellenic Award 
in the IT4GOV competition for the smart city application Sense City (https://sense.city/), which has already been 
installed in and used by three cities in the region (Patras, Pyrgos and Zakynthos).  
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 155 
 
 
Dr. Christos Tranoris (Male) is a Senior Researcher, he received his Diploma degree in 1999 and since 2006 he 
holds also a Ph.D. from the Electrical and Computer Engineering of University of Patras in the area of software 
processes in the modelling and design of industrial applications. Since 1995 he has worked in the private sector as 
a software engineer. During his Ph.D. worked for and founded several ICT companies. In 2001 he co-founded the 
software company Instance Ltd. After 2006 he worked as Software Tech. Lead QE in Bytemobile’s Eu ropean 
Development Centre. He is currently a Research Fellow at the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering 
at the University of Patras. He has published over 30 papers in journals and conferences and holds one patent, is a 
member of IEEE, ACM an d the Technical Chamber of Greece. Since 2008 he has participated in several FIRE 
projects (AutoI, Panlab-PII, Openlab, INFINITY-Tender, FORGE, 5GinFIRE). He has significant experience in 
the development of experimentation infrastructures and tools, he led  the development of certain FIRE tools and 
he will be primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed research and/or innovation activities in 5G-VINNI. 
 
Dr. Odysseas Koufopavlou (Male) is a Professor at the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at 
UoP. He received his Diploma of Electrical Engineering in 1983 and this PhD degree in Electrical Engineering in 
1990, both from University of Patras, Greece. From 1990 to 1994 he was at the IBM Thomas J. Watson Research 
Center in USA. His research interests include computer networks, high performance communication subsystems 
architecture and implementation, VLSI low power design, and VLSI crypto systems. He served as conference 
General Chair of the ICECS 1999, SEAA 2009, DSD 2009. He was member of organising and technical program 
committees of many major conferences. He leads several projects funded by the European Commission, the Greek 
government, and major companies. He has also been a consultant for several companies. Dr.Koufopavlou has 
published more than 200 technical papers and received patents and inventions. He is a member of IEEE, the IFIP 
10.5 WG, Euromicro Society and the Technical Chamber of Greece. 
 
Christina Politi (Female) is an Assistant Professor at the Department of Informatics and Telecommunications at 
the University of Peloponnese and Visiting researcher at NAM group, University of Patras. She has a long 
experience in designing and providing optoelectronic components, s ystems and networks for optical 
communications as well as in the area of novel application paradigms. She received a B.Sc. in physics from the 
University of Athens in 1998 and a M.Sc. degree in the "Physics of laser communications" from the University of 
Essex in 2000. Subsequently, she joined the Photonic Network Research Group in the Department of Electronic 
Systems Engineering at the University of Essex where she worked until early 2005 and obtained her PhD. In 2005 
she joined the National Technical University of Athens – Telecommunications Laboratory as a research associate 
where she worked in various IST and national projects. During this period she was also a visiting lecturer at the 
University of Peloponnese, which she joined at the end of 2008 as an Assistant Professor. Since 2015 she 
participated as Network Expert in the OPCR - Οpen Programmable City Region project (Bristol Council and 
University of Bristol), that delivers the design of the first open optical SDN network for smart cities. Currently 
she is involved with Patras Smart City Innovation Hub, Patras Science Park. She is a co -author of over 100 
international journal and conference publications in the area of optical communication systems and subsystems 
and optical networks. Her research intere sts include optical networking and optical switching with emphasis on 
optical switch architectures and subsystems, optical packet and circuit switched networks, high speed optical 
networks and data center interconnection. Recently her work focuses on innov ative technologies in digital 
infrastructures for IoT applications and smart cities. 
 
George Lekatsas  (Male) is the Head of the Network Operation Center at UOP. He graduated from the 
Mathematics Department of the University of Patras (1989) and has a master's degree (MSc) Information Systems 
Engineering from the Department of Electrical Engineering at Southbank University in London. Since 1992 he 
has worked for companies: Intrasoft, Bank of Central Greece, Intracom and IBM in areas related to the analy sis, 
design, installation and management of information systems.  In 2001  he joined the newly established Network 
Operation Center (University of Patras) as a senior researcher speciali sing in electronic communication and 
information issues, identification services, security and computer systems. He is responsible for the UPatras GDPR 
Compliance Project and has assumed the role of Data Protection Officer. George will serve as the data privacy 
single point of contact of UOP in 5G-SOLUTIONS. 
 
Relevant Publications 
1. Evangelos Haleplidis, Spyros Denazis, Kostas Pentikousis, David Meyer, Odysseas Koufopavlou, “SDN 
Layers and Architecture Terminology”, RFC 7426, IRTF, January 2015. 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 156 
 
2. Evangelos Haleplidis, Jamal Hadi Salim, Spyros Denazis and Odysseas Koufopavlou, "Towards a Network 
Abstraction Model for SDN", Journal of Network and Systems Management: Special Issue on Management 
of Software Defined Networks, pp. 1-19, 2014. 
3. Evangelos Haleplidis, Spyros Denazis, Odysseas Koufopavlou, Damascene Joachimpillai, Jamal Hadi Salim, 
Diego Lopez, Jason Martin, and Kostas Pentikousis. "‘ForCES applicability to SDN-enhanced NFV." In Third 
European Workshop on Software Defined Networks. 2014. 
4. Anastasius Gavras, Spyros Denazis, Halid Hrasnica, Christos Tranoris, “Re quirements and design of 5G 
experimental environments for vertical industry innovations”, gwsummit2017, 2017 Global Wireless Summit, 
15-18/10/2017 Cape Town, South Africa 
5. C. Tranoris,  S. Denazis, FSToolkit: Adopting Software Engineering Practices for Enab ling Definitions of 
Federated Resource Infrastructures, Future Internet Assembly 2012: From Promises to Reality Series: Lecture 
Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 7281 Subseries: Information Systems and Applications, incl. Internet/Web, 
and HCI, 2012, ISBN 978-3-642-30240-4 p 201, 211, Volume 7281, 2012, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-30241-
1. 
Relevant Projects 
1. 5G-VINNI [5G-PPP Phase 3]: ‘5G Verticals Innovation Platform’ will accelerate the uptake of 5G in Europe 
by providing an end-to-end (E2E) facility that validates the performance of new 5G technologies by operating 
trials of advanced vertical sector services. The 5G-VINNI strategy to achieve this involves: (1) Designing the 
most advanced 5G facility to demonstrate that technical and business 5G KPIs can be met, (2) Building and 
operating 7 interworking instances of the E2E facility to prove the capabilities and openness of the system, (3) 
Creating user friendly zero -touch orchestration, operations and management systems for the 5G -VINNI 
facilities to ensure operational efficiencies and optimal resource use, (4) Proving the 5G -VINNI capabilities 
through extensive experiments and measurements of performance against the 5G  KPIs, (5) Developing a 
viable 5G ecosystem model to support the NaaS infrastructure provision as a sustainable business beyond the 
project, and (6) Promoting the value of 5G -VINNI results to the relevant standards bodies and open source 
communities. The 5 GVINNI E2E facility will demonstrate the achievement of 5G KPIs across a range of 
combinations and permutations of new 5G access technologies and end-user equipment types interconnected 
by the most advanced 5G core network technologies available. The 5G -VINNI facilities include seven 
infrastructure instances in nationally supported 5G nodes across Europe; this number may be expanded as the 
ICT-19 projects come on-line in 2019. (started 01/07/2018) https://www.5g-vinni.eu/.  
2. 5GinFIRE [EU]: 5GinFIRE objective is to build and operate an Open, and Extensible 5G NFV -based 
Reference (Open5G -NFV) ecosystem of Experimental Facilities that not only integrates existing FIRE 
facilities with new vertical-specific ones but also lays down the foundations for instantiating fully softwarised 
architectures of vertical industries and experimenting with them.  (01/01/2017 – 31/12/2019). 
https://5ginfire.eu/  
Significant Infrastructure 
− The Patras 5G-VINNI main facility infrastructure including 5G related white boxes to act as blueprints 
to other sites; 
− The BSS/OSS experimentation portal; 
− The sence city service together with usage analytics by the citizens of Patras (http://sense.city); 
− The Patras LoRaWAN IoT infrastructure (https://www.thethingsnetwork.org/community/patras/) 
 
 
4.1.22 PROCTER & GAMBLE SERVICES COMPANY NV 
Short Name PGBS 
 
Country Belgium 
Type Industrial Partner 
Number of employees 900 Belgium, 95.000 worldwide 
Website www.pg.com  
Short Profile 
Procter & Gamble Services Company NV (PGBS) is a global leader in consumer products with thousands of 
innovators in development centres and more than 20 plants. The PGBS’ Innovation Centre (BIC) performs key 
activities for holistic product innovation for Fabric and Home Care products. These activities include technology 
development, consumer understanding, product, package and process design, industrial and brand design as well 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 157 
 
as engineering. It is one of the 3 Mega Innovation Hubs in Europe. These mega -hubs contain all the elements 
necessary to invest in the innovation of both existing and new products. PGBS’ BIC hosts over 50 nationalities, 
which provides researchers and students a unique chance to experience living in a multicultural environment. The 
BIC site has a yearly investment in >1000 people and more than 100 million euro in innovation for the fabric and 
home care products. It covers products like laundry detergents, dish products, fabric enhancers and air care 
products. It contains all the requirements for generating innovation, from idea generation to pilot plants and lead-
lines. The engineers and digitisation experts develop the strategies and approaches for the collaboration and 
deployment across the plants in Europe. Technology avenues such as big data analysis of plant data and process 
analytics are created in the Brussels Innovation centres and then implemented in the plants in Europe. This is 
enabled by a collaboration between process R&D experts, process engineers and chemists. The product of soluble 
unit dose is the most complex up to date as it combines both the processing of complex liquid chemical mixtures 
and assembly of mechanical components. BIC has a pilot facility and a lead-line for these products. In addition, it 
leads the engineering for implementation with the production plants in Mechelen and Amiens. 
 
Role in the project 
PBGS will participate as an industrial end-user in the Factories of the Future use cases. In particular, in UC1.1, to 
enable full automation of a digital plant, leveraging advanced technology, such as visual recognition of quality 
control on, for instance, bottles on a line, and hyperspectral imaging of co mplex products and vision systems on 
advanced robotics. The data needs to be collected and optimised across plants; In UC1.2, for tracking of materials 
(e.g. spare parts) and tracking of product stocks; In UC1.3 related to next generation plant planning/scheduling to 
increase plant productivity by better utilisation of the assets, 5G will enable  PBGS to bring this to the next level 
across sites and with new algorithms for dynamic, reactive scheduling; In UC1.4 home services will be validated 
for laundry that require connected machines t o continuously track and anticipate consumer laundry (imaging & 
spectral data). 
Key Personnel 
Dr.Francesc Corominas (Male)  obtained his PhD (with honours) in Chemical Engineering from the Institut 
Quimic de Sarria/ Universitat Ramon LLull (Barcelona) in 2000. He started his career in PGBS in 2001, working 
on the design of new processes to produce consumer goods liquids. He is the writer of more than 10 patents on the 
processing and making of detergents. He is now a Principal Engineer at PGBS. In 2009, he received the J.G. Smale 
Award (P&G- R&D most prestigious award on innovation). 
 
Andre Convents (Male)  is the Head of “Connect+Develop” Section at PGBS. With 20 years of international 
experience at P&G, he led global multi-functional technology and product development initiatives. He is an open 
innovation expert with extensive hands -on management of strate gic alliances and collaborations across 
universities, companies and institutes. He is the leader of the open innovation program in Fabric Cae BU business 
unit. With a keen interest in team collaboration, he led global culture change initiatives to enable o rganisational 
transformation in a large organisation. As a passionate innovator, he led both intrapreneurial new business 
initiatives and global and regional collaborations with SMEs. He received his PhD from the Vrije Unversiteit 
Brussel. Andre is the inventor of more than 30 patents, and the author of numerous peer reviewed journals. 
 
‘Procter & Gamble Services Company N.V. will appoint, from project’s start, a data privacy single point of contact 
in its team, in view of ensuring all of Procter & Gamble S ervices Company N.V. project’s data processing 
activities, if any, are fully compliant with GDPR.’ 
Relevant Projects 
1. ICONET [EU]: New ICT infrastructure and reference architecture to support Operations in future PI Logistics 
NETworks. ICONET will significantly extend state of the art research and development around the PI concept 
in pursuit of a new networked architecture for interconnected logistics hubs that combine with IoT capabilities 
and aiming towards commercial exploitation of results. (01/09/2018 – 28/02/2021).  
2. F³ FACTORY [EU]: ‘Flexible, Fast and Future Production Processes’. The F3 consortium’s vision is that the 
EU’s chemical industry’s competitive position would be strongly enhanced if it could operate modular 
continuous plant (F3 plant) which combines world scale continuous plant efficiency, consistency and 
scalability with the versatility of batch operation. Th e new production mode is based on 1) Plug -and Play 
modular chemical production technology, 2) Holistic process design methodology applying process 
intensification concepts and innovative decision tools. (01/06/2009 – 31/07/2013). http://www.f3factory.com/. 
3. E4Water [EU]: ‘ Economically and Ecologically Efficient Water Management in the European Chemical 
Industry’. The main objective was to develop, test and validate new integrated approaches, methodologies and 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 158 
 
process technologies for a more efficient and sustainable management of water in chemical industry with 
cross-fertilization possibilities to other industrial sectors. (01/05/2012 – 30/04/2016).  
4. CAP-IT! [EU]: ‘Advanced encapsulation technology for sustainable det ergency’. The project aimed to 
develop a deep mechanistic understanding and coating of encapsulation processes to stabilize actives in fluid 
compacted consumer goods. (01/06/2010 – 31/05/2014).  
5. ISSFLOW [EU]: ‘ Intelligent Structuring Systems for Complex Fl owing Products’. This project aimed at 
developing fundamental understanding of complex fluids to allow for the design of smart and functional gels 
and fluids via the development of novel rheology modifiers. (01/01/2014 – 31/12/2017).  
Significant Infrastructure 
The PGBS’ BIC (Brussels Innovation Center) is equipped with the following:  
− More than 2000 m2 of laboratories with bench -scale equipment to design and develop new products for the 
Fabric & Home Care sector. This includes the making and testing of consumer products, stabilization of actives 
in fluids and effectiveness of detergency raw materials.  
− PGBS databases and specific modelling programs on detergent activity.  
− More than 1000 m2 of Pilot Plant facilities, with state -of-the-art equipment to make and process liquids. 
Examples of this equipment are batch tanks of different sizes,  and Continuous Liquid Processes capable of 
operating at very different rates.  
− More than 700 m2 of laboratories with analytical equipment for chemistry and physic-chemical analysis.  
− Direct access to state -of-the art inline technologies in the area of spe ctroscopy (Raman, Near and Mid 
Infrared), rheology, appearance, colour, hyperspectral imaging. 
− The 2 plants for soluble unit dose are in driving distance to develop and implement the technology. 
4.1.23 PROMOZIONE PER L INNOVAZIONE FRA INDUSTRIA E UNIVERSITA ASSOCIAZIONE 
Short Name PIIU  
Country Italy 
Type Research  
Number of employees 6 
Website www.piu-innovazione.org  
Short Profile 
The Promozione per l Innovazione fra Industria e Universita Associazione (PIIU) is a not-for-profit organisation 
specialising in Innovation Management with the aim to promote technological innovation as well as impro ve 
transfer of know-how between industries, with a focus on SMEs, and Research Centres.  
 
Its Members are ICT experts and professionals working in the world of technological innovation in various 
industrial project settings. The focus of the Association is to identify the contexts, forms and methods to drive 
efficiently the communication, col laboration and linkage among industries, recogni sing that effective 
collaboration is key to the mutual ability to innovate and improve the occurrence of Innovation Based Technology. 
At a national level, PIIU is collaborating with over 100 industrial partners in many multidisciplinary projects. At 
an international level, there is strong involvement in European collaborative R&D projects, especially in the Future 
Internet and Big Data areas. 
Role in the project 
PIIU will contribute in the creation and maintenance of the concrete plan for the dissemination and use of 
knowledge of the project. Moreover, PIIU will participate in the dissemination actions of the project in scientific 
and business events and will be responsible for the project’s visibility through online channels, such as the online 
social media channels. PIIU will also participate in the activities related to the involvement of external SMEs with 
a specific program in order to accelerate the European ICT ecosystem by creating and supporting new businesses 
by unlocking the commercial potential of high -value solutions offered by 5G SOLUTIONS in line with the 
stakeholders’ engagement and community building strategy. PIIU will lead T9.3 Community Building (EAB setup, 
participation in 5G-PPP WGs, SB, TB). 
Key Personnel 
Maurizio Bausi (Male) is a Scientific Coordinator at PIIU. Maurizio is heavily involved in project design phases, 
negotiation, implementation, dissemination and communications activities and is responsible for the exploitation 
of R&D results in the ICT sector. He graduated from the Engineering department of the University La Sapienza, 
and since 1977 he has been working in ICT related field s in SW large companies such as FINSIEL and the ICT 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 159 
 
Department of Alitalia. With his professional experience he has taken part in several ICT projects for government 
and research projects launched by the European Commission.  He managed several ICT Business Unit, aimed to 
the provision of services for industrial companies and public bodies, deal ing also with the definition of 
organisational and customer support processes.  He is well experienced in the Project Management of research 
activities in the SW modelling (EU and Italian funded projects). Maurizio will serve as the data privacy single 
point of contact of PIIU in 5G-SOLUTIONS.  
 
Barbara Ferraioli (Female) has been working in project management at international level for several years in 
ICT and consultancy firms. As team leader she takes care of the overall coordination, implementation, control of 
ICT R&D projects while ensuring their consistency with the business strategy, commitments  and goals. Her 
everyday activities include  the planning and implementation of the project ; the assembly and coordination of 
project staff, resources allocation; planning and scheduling of project timelines; quality monitoring and report on 
progress of the project to the stakeholders; implementation and management of project changes. Her specific 
expertise and experience focus on prototypes technical verification, socio-economic evaluation and assessment of 
R&D projects results. 
Relevant Projects 
1. 5G-EVE [5G-PPP Phase 3]: ‘5G European Validation platform for Extensive trials’. 5G-EVE aims to create 
the foundations for a pervasive roll -out of end -to-end 5G networks in Europe. The project supports this 
fundamental transition by offering to vertical industries and to all 5G-PPP Phase3 projects facilities to validate 
their network KPIs and their services.  PIIU is taking care of the overall administration of the project 
consortium and is also responsible of the community building activities. (started 01/07/2018). https://www.5g-
eve.eu/.  
2. FI-CORE [EU]: ‘Future Internet – Core’. FI-CORE will deliver a) Technology extensions, introducing new 
capabilities to the platform, b) means for platform availability, including the launch of operational FI -Ware 
nodes across Europe with resources and tools to support them, as well as extensive FI -Ware education and 
training programs for Web entrepreneurs and SMEs plus c) Processes and tools for pla tform sustainability, 
dissemination of current and on-going results, namely FI-WARE, FI-Ops and FI-Lab. These will be a globally 
competitive foundation for Europe's economy. PIIU is responsible of the Open Call for new FIWARE LAB 
Nodes. (01/09/2014 – 31/12/2016).  
3. XIFI [EU]: ‘eXperimental Infrastructures for the Future Internet’ will establish a sustainable marketplace for 
trial infrastructures and Future Internet services. In XIFI PIIU was responsible of the contractual management 
of 38 partners in 7 countries. (01/04/2013 – 30/09/2015).  
 
4.1.24 TENELOR ASA 
Short Name TNOR  
Country Norway 
Type Industrial 
Number of employees >30.000 
Website http://www.telenor.com/  
Short Profile 
Telenor ASA (TNOR) is an international provider of high -quality telecommunications, data and media 
communication services to customers in eight markets across Asia and Scandinavia with headquarter in Oslo, 
Norway. TNOR is also a leading provider of fixed-line and media services to the Scandinavian countries. TNOR 
is one of Norway’s largest companies with revenues in 2017 of approx. NOK 125 billion and a work force of more 
than 20,000 domestically and abroad.  
 
This project participation will be driven by Telenor Research which is the scientific research arm of TNOR, playing 
a key role in providing insight and competence enabling TNOR to become a s oftware and data-driven company. 
Telenor Research conducts research on new technology and service opportunities, changing consumer behaviour, 
changing regulatory regimes, the competitive environment and new technology platforms driving changes in the 
eco-system. Telenor Research has extensive cooperation with industry and other research establishments at home 
and abroad, securing access to leading edge knowledge.  
 
TNOR has experience in running experiments on wireless technologies, ranging from RAN and Cor e as well as 
impact from technology on business and ecosystems. TNOR also have experience in designing, building, testing 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 160 
 
and validating technologies and systems such as 3GPP, transport, NFV, SDN, Orchestration, operating support 
systems, business support systems, satellite systems and their interworking. Moreover, TNOR is also involved in 
relevant SDOs such as 3GPP, ETSI NFV ISG and IETF, and in open source communities such as Open Source 
MANO (OSM). 
 
TNOR coordinates 5G-VINNI (5G-PPP Phase 3) project that was recently launched. 5G-VINNI aims to accelerate 
the uptake of 5G in Europe by providing an end -to-end (E2E) facility that validates the performance of new 5G 
technologies by operating trials of advanced vertical sector services.  
Role in the project 
In 5G-SOLUTIONS, TNOR will support both the NTNU FoF use case and the YARA Smart Port use case, and 
in these use case areas enable and explore new 5G technologies, services and business models for vertical 
enterprise customers. TNOR will explore new servi ces, opportunities and synergies for and across smart city / 
building / campus (whether public, private, university or industry sectors), FoF / Industry 4.0 and smart port, as 
enabled by IoT and MEC. 
 
TNOR will support Smart City use cases at the Kongsberg 5G-VINNI facility, and prepare and support the Herøya 
facility (Smart Port) and the extended Trondheim facility (FoF and Smart City co-creation). The latter will be the 
basis for Smart City co-creation, research and innovation with NTNU Smart Sustainable City, and other relevant 
partners. Furthermore, TNOR will support and explore the assured service quality (ASQ) interconnection paths 
and value-added connectivity (VAC) on-demand across country borders (based on 5G-VINNI developments) for 
media, advanced user experience and business critical communication use cases in 5G -SOLUTIONS as well as 
other ICT-19 projects. This will include exploration and research in the area of service assurance, QoS and QoE. 
Exploration and research into the different u se cases where TNOR is engaged, addressing critical industrial and 
business service scenarios, SLAs and supporting mechanisms.  
 
TNOR will design thinking processes, co-creation and collaboration with vertical users and stakeholders, including 
new business models are all important areas for exploration and research, and relevant tools and methods will be 
leveraged and assessed in the project phase.  TNOR will also e xplore and research into the different use cases 
where TNOR is engaged, addressing critical in dustrial and business service scenarios, SLAs and supporting 
mechanisms.  
 
TNOR will lead WP7 ‘Multi-vertical concurrent validation field trials’, as well as the following tasks: 
• T1.5 Methodology for the technological and business validation of 5G E2E conn ectivity and associated 
management within and across verticals 
• T7.1 LL planning, setup and operational management 
• T7.3 Performance evaluation and lessons learned 
• T8.5 Clustering plan and activities for international cooperation and exchange of results 
• T10.3 Technical Management 
Key Personnel 
Dr.  Min Xie (Female) is a Research Scientist at Telenor Research. She received her PhD in Electrical Engineering 
from the University of Notre Dame, USA, in 2007. She worked as A research associate at the University of Notre 
Dame, USA, and the University College London, UK, respectively, from  2007 to 2010. Her research interests 
include performance analysis and assurance in communications and networking systems, including quality of 
service and quality of experience. She is currently working on 5G, NFV, SDN, and service assurance. She is a 
member of IEEE and she has also been involved in many H2020 projects.  
 
Hanne-Stine Hallingby (Female) is a Research Scientist at Telenor Research. She is about to defend her PhD in 
innovation from the University of Oslo, and holds Masters in Business & Econo mics and Marketing & Strategy 
from BI Norwegian Business School. Over the years she has published numerous articles, reports, and 
journals such as Technology Analysis & Strategic management, and Telematics and Informatics. She joined 
TNOR in 1990, and has extensive experience as a researcher and project manager in T NOR’s operations. Her 
interests include technology change, innovation, ecosystems and market dynamics in the telecom sector, as well 
as user aspects of telecommunication.  
 
Per J. Nesse (Male) is a Senior Research Scientist at Telenor Research. He has expertise in innovation 
management, business development together with financial analysis and entrepreneurship. He has extensive 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 161 
 
experience from managing research and service development projects in TNOR and research programs together 
with international enterprises and universities. Currently , Nesse is the project manager in the Telenor Start IoT 
(Internet of Things) program together with NTNU in Trondheim , where the aim is to develop an IoT ecosystem  
directed towards different business verticals, e.g Municipalities, Industry and Transportation. Previously , Nesse 
was the Project Manager of the EURESCOM study: Business Models and Service Level Agreements in Open Value 
Chains (2004) and Exploitation Manager of the European Akogrimo research project (Framework Programme 6: 
2004-2007). Per J. Nesse holds a PhD. from Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU) and a 
Master of Science in Business from Nord University, Graduate School of Business in Norway. He is an Associate 
Pprofessor at NTNU in the Industrial Economics and Technology Management Department.  
 
Håkon Lønsethagen (Male) is a Senior Research Scientist at Telenor Research. He received a BSc in electrical 
engineering and computer science from University of Colorado, Boulder, USA, in 1987. He was granted a Siv.ing 
(MSc.) from the Norwegian Institute of Technology in 1988. Si nce 1990, Lønsethagen has been working with 
telecom networks and service management and control, including distributed systems frameworks, architectures 
and middleware, both as a researcher and project leader. Over the last years , his activities have addressed inter-
provider network services and business models, Internet evolution, lately including SDN, NFV and 5G 
ecosystems. This includes curiosity to discover and analyse dependencies between technical architecture, business 
architecture and multi -provider ecosystem platforms. Mr. Lønsethagen has participated in several EU projects, 
often as WP or Task Leader, and also as an A dvisory board member of EU projects NEAT and SmartenIT. In 
2016 he served as editorial team lead for the NetWorld2020 whitepaper on p rinciples for an evolved Internet 
ecosystem. Currently, he is engaged as board member of both 5G -IA and NetWorld2020. Hakon will serve as 
the Technical Manager of 5G -SOLUTIONS and also lead WP7 ‘Multi-vertical concurrent validation field 
trials’. 
 
Helene Lie Røhr (female) is a Research Scientist at Telenor Research. She holds a PhD in economics from BI 
Norwegian Business School (2018) and an MSc in Economics from the University of Oslo (2006). Her research 
interests are within micro -econometrics covering c onsumer behavior, competition, regulation, and political 
economy. She has published in European Economic Review and Handbook of Mobile Communication, Culture, 
and Information. Dr. Røhr has given invited presentations at Erasmus School of Economics, Norwegian University 
of Life Science, and the Frisch Centre. Additionally, she has presented her research at numerous conferences 
including the European Meeting of the Economic Science Association (2016),  the Nordic Conference of 
Behavioral and Experimental Economics (2016, 2018),  and the Annual Meeting of the Norwegian Association of 
Economics (2016, 2017, 2018). Dr. Røhr has worked in the telecom industry for more than 10 years, and she has 
broad experience in analyzing the business models, competitive dynamic s, and strategic challenges faced by a 
telecom operator.  
 
Dr. Kashif Mahmood (male)  is a Senior Research Scientist in Telenor Research, Norway and the deputy 
Technical manager of 5G-VINNI. His current research interests are in the area of next generation mobile network 
architecture, network slicing, low power wide area networks for machine type communication, analyzing cellular 
traffic, and traffic modelling for wireless communication systems. Kashif obtained his M.Sc. degree from GIK 
Institute, Pakistan a nd a Ph.D. in Telematics from Norwegian university of science and technology (NTNU), 
Norway. 
 
Telenor ASA will appoint, from project’s start, a data privacy single point of contact in its team, in view of ensuring 
all of Telenor ASA  project’s data processing activities, if any, are fully compliant with GDPR.’ 
Relevant Projects 
1. 5G-VINNI [5G-PPP Phase 3]: ‘5G Verticals Innovation Platform’ will accelerate the uptake of 5G in Europe 
by providing an end-to-end (E2E) facility that validates the performance of new 5G technologies by operating 
trials of advanced vertical sector services. The 5GVINNI E2E facility will demonstrate the achievement of 5G 
KPIs across a range of combinations and permutations of new 5G access technologies and end-user equipment 
types interconnected by the most advanced 5G core network technologies available. The 5G-VINNI facilities 
include seven infrastructure instances in nationally supported 5G nodes across Europe; this number may be 
expanded as the ICT-19 projects come on-line in 2019. (started 01/07/2018) https://www.5g-vinni.eu/. 
2. To-Euro-5G [5G-PPP Phase 2]: support the activities of the European 5G Initiative during the second phase 
of the 5G-PPP from June 2017 to June 2019, as outlined in the 5G contractual Public Private Partnership 
(cPPP) signed between the 5G Infrastructure Association (5G -I- A) and the European Commission, with the 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 162 
 
intention of maximising the return on this investment for Eur ope. (01/06/2017 – 31/08/2019). https://5g-
ppp.eu/to-euro-5g/.  
3. 5GEx [EU]: ‘5G Exchange ’ aims to enable cross -domain orchestration of services over multiple 
administrations or over multi-domain single administrations. This will allow end-to-end network and service 
elements to mix in multi -vendor, heterogeneous technology and resource environments.  (01/10/2015 – 
30/06/2018). http://www.5gex.eu/.  
 
4.1.25 WATERFORD INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY 
Short Name WIT 
 
Country Ireland 
Type Academic 
Number of employees ~1.000 
Website https://www.tssg.org/  
Short Profile 
Waterford Institute of Technology (WIT) is the major provider of higher education in the South East region of 
Ireland and one of the largest Institutes of Technology's in Ireland. The Institute's range and scope reflect the 
changing needs of the southeast as well as the country’s as a whole. WIT hosts the Telecommunications Software 
& Systems Group (TSSG). TSSG is an internationally recognized centre of excellence for ICT research and 
innovation. It carries out a wide spectrum of industry -informed research in Information and Communications 
Technologies (ICT), particularly techn ologies enabling communications and information services. TSSG’s four 
key prioritised technical research areas include: Mobile Platforms and Services, Security Privacy and Identity, 
Data Analytics and Social computing and finally, Adaptive Networks and services. TSSG creates economic impact 
by translating its knowledge base and innovation into leading edge products and services by continuing their 
engagement with Industry in collaborative R&D, knowledge generation and transfer. Over the past five years, 
TSSG has delivered innovative solutions to over 110 Irish companies, and has created 11 spin -out companies in 
the South East including the award winning FeedHenry, a ground-breaking mobile cloud platform company, and 
ZolkC, a leading provider of mobile technology for international visitor attractions. The TSSG maintains an active 
group in the Intelligent transport system (ITS) with specific focused areas of interest as follows: 
− 5G: Automotive / Transport Vertical. 
− V to X communications. 
− Smart Urban Transport/ Context-Aware Platforms. 
− Mobility as A Service 
 
TSSG is also merging its decades of experience delivering successful ICT research, with the needs and expertise 
of the Life Sciences and Healthcare sectors. They have successfully built partnerships with both  academia and 
industry to progress the digital health research field and deliver end solutions to their industry partners. The Future 
Health Lab is committed to achieving better health outcomes through their focus on the following thematic areas: 
− Pervasive Sensing & IoT. 
− Gait and Movement Analysis. 
− Molecular Communications & Synthetic Biology. 
− Clinical Data as a Service (CDaaS). 
− VR Neurorehabilitation/Adaptation. 
− mHealth Technologies 
 
Role in the project 
Leveraging WIT’s expertise from  successfully coordinating the 5G-PPP CogNet project, WIT directly use the 
results of this work in the management of 5G networks in the 5G -SOLUTIONS project. WIT will lead T1.4 
Methodology for the definition of test reports format, parameters and test points, and benchmarking for the results. 
WIT is expected to reinforce their  understanding of 5G network in different verticals and further consolidate 
expertise in 5G, ITS and relevant areas. The research work of 5G will be carried out in both the application level 
and the theoretical study level, to validate core 5G slicing, virtualisation technologies, architectures and 
corresponding KPIs linked to specific use cases and scenarios within 5G-SOLUTIONS. 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 163 
 
Key Personnel 
Frances Cleary (Female) is currently a Research Unit Manager for the Mobile Ecosystem and Pervasive Sensing 
(MEPS) Research Unit in TSSG, Waterford Institute oF Technology. Since joining WIT/TSSG Frances has 
worked in the following main thematic research areas (as task leader, wo rk package leader and project 
manager/coordinator): Pervasiveness in converged telecommunications, user -centric paradigm for seamless 
mobility in Future internet, federated testbed management and Embedded software quality assurance and testing. 
Frances has multiple years of experience as a EU Project coordinator of SecCord and Effectsplus EU FP7 CSA 
funded research projects that relates to trust and security (responsible for security research project clustering, 
leading to increased collaboration, dissemina tion, networking strategic research agenda’s, road mapping and 
research to industry translation. Frances has also successfully Project coordinated and actively lead the 
Cybersecurity & Privacy (CSP) Forum initiative funded via the EU FP7 SecCord project, this project focused on 
EU research collaboration, networking  and clustering activities of funded EU trust and security research projects. 
With 12 years’ experience of working in EU funded research projects, Frances also over the past 2 years has 
specifically been focusing on smart and connected mobility research topics and has a direct interest in urban 
mobility, transport and automotive related research thematic areas (e.g. ADAS, MaaS, intelligent/Smart transport 
and mobility and the adoption and use of I CT technologies to intelligent transport systems, physical Internet). 
Frances recently actively worked on the EU H2020 funded project called DISCOVERY http://discoveryproject.eu/ 
, that specifically focused on international cooperation supporting dialogues between Europe and North America 
(US and Canada). Here she actively contributed to working group activities relating to funding mechanisms and 
Cybersecurity, fostering cooperation in collaborative ICT Research & Innovation, and she contributed to the 
annual Transatlantic ICT Forum. Currently Frances is a Research Unit Manager in TSSG, Waterford Institute Of 
Technology and actively leads a Unit that has expertise relating to Pervasive sensing, Embedded Systems 
Communications and Bio -Nano Communications. The  Unit specifically focuses on new innovations and 
application of new emerging technologies across the Health and Transport verticals. 
 
Kieran Sullivan (Male) is a Senior Research Engineer, working on EU projects since 2008. His experience spans 
trust and security, future networks, and critical infrastructure. He has coordinated a number of Coordination and 
Support Actions (CSA)s and he is also a partner in the CSA, To-Euro-5G, the umbrella project in Phase-2 of 5G-
PPP. Kieran has published papers in the are as of network management, machine-learning, and energy efficiency 
in the network. He is a former journalist and certified technical writer. He holds an MSc in Computer Science, 
BSc in Applied Physics, and a post-graduate diploma in technical communication. 
 
Martin Tolan (Male) joined Telecommunication Software & Systems Group (TSSG) of WIT in 2014 and has 
been involved EU projects since. His current role within TSSG is as the Technical Lead with the Mobile Services 
Research Unit. Within this role he was the technical coordinator and the coordinator for the CogNet project (RIA), 
from Phase -1 of the 5G -PPP H2020 which completed its successful final review in Q1 2018. Martin also 
participated in the various 5G -PPP Working Groups such as the Technical Board, Ste ering Board, Architecture 
WG, the Network Management & QoS WG and more recently joined the 5G Automotive WG which was only set 
up in the second half of 2017. Prior to joining TSSG, Martin was a project manager and a principle engineer with 
ABB which expose d Martin to a wealth of technology and business opportunities in the successful delivery of 
many multi -million Euro projects over a period of fifteen years. Martins main interests now lie in the cloud 
architecture and network management domains utilising IoT, Network Management and the application of AI (in 
particular Machine Learning) to each of these fields to complement and offload a lot of the traditional manual 
effort required in the management of these systems.  
 
Dr.Ruisong Han (Male) is currently a Postdoctoral Researcher in TSSG, supported by the H2020 EGNSS GSA 
EU project TransSec. Before he joined TSSG, he received his PhD in Communication and Information Systems 
in 2018 and BEng. in Telecommunications Engineering in 2012, at Beijing Jiaotong University (Beijing, China). 
From July 2015 to August 2016, he was invited as a visiting PhD student, in the School of Electronic and Electrical 
Engineering at the University of Leeds in the UK. He has published seven research papers as the first author and 
three as the co-author. His current research interest lies in the areas of Vehicle-to-everything (V2X) and Wireless 
Sensor Networks (WSN). 
 
Corina Power (Female) is a Lecturer at WIT. Corina is also a Program Tutor and Module Tutor for the Waterford 
& Wexford education & training boards. Corina is also a member of the Data Protection Office at WIT, and a 
senior member of the GDPR working group who is providing the training and guidance for the organisation on 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 164 
 
how to navigate the GDPR regulations. Corina will serve as the data privacy single point of contact of WIT in 
5G-SOLUTIONS. 
 
Relevant Publications 
1. M. T. Barros, S. Balasubramaniam and R. Mullins. Integrated Terahertz Communication with Reflectors for 
5G Small Cell Networks. Accepted in the IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology. 2017. 
2. M. T. Barros, G. Velez, H. Arregui, E. Loyo, K. Sharma, A. Mujika and B. Jennings. CogITS: Cognitive -
enabled network management for 5G V2X Communication. Submitted for magazine publication. 2017. 
3. M. T. Barros, R. C. Gomes, A. F. Costa, Routing Architecture for Vehicular Ad -Hoc Networks. IEEE Latin 
America Transactions, v. 10, p. 1411-1419. 2012.  
4. R. Mijumbi, J. Serrat, J. -L. Gorricho, S. Latre, M. Charalambides, and D. Lopez, "Manage ment and 
orchestration challenges in network functions virtualization," IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 54, no. 
1, pp. 98-105, 2016. 
5. B. Naudts, M. Flores, R. Mijumbi, S. Verbrugge, J. Serrat, and D. Colle, "A dynamic pricing algorithm for a 
network of virtual resources," International Journal of Network Management, vol. 27, no. 2, 2017 
Relevant Projects 
1. To-Euro-5G [5G-PPP Phase 2]: support the activities of the European 5G Initiative during the second phase 
of the 5G-PPP from June 2017 to June 2019, as outlined in the 5G contractual Public Private Partnership 
(cPPP) signed between the 5G Infrastructure Association (5G -I- A) and the European Commission, with the 
intention of maximising the return on this investment for Europe.  (01/06/2017 – 31/08/2019). https://5g-
ppp.eu/to-euro-5g/. 
2. CogNet [5G-PPP Phase 1 ]: ‘Building an Intelligent System of Insights and Action for 5G Network 
Management’. CogNet will develop solutions to provide a highly automated and more intelligent level of 
network monitoring and management, improve operational and energy efficiencies, quality of experience for 
the end user and facilitate the requirements of 5G. (01/07/2015 – 31/12/2017).  http://www.cognet.5g-ppp.eu/. 
3. AQUASMART [EU]: The AquaSmart project is about enhancing innovation capacity within the aquaculture 
sector, by helping companies to transform captured data into knowledge and use this knowledge to 
dramatically improve performance. It also supports production benchmarking through access to global data. 
The project is based in the real world, addressing actual problems that aquaculture producers face and is run 
by a skilled and experienced consortium including top research institutes, a major player in the aquaculture IT 
sector and three highly innovative aquaculture companies. (02/02/2015 – 01/02/2017) 
http://www.aquasmartdata.eu/. 
4. CONNECT [Other]: Large sca le (€30m) Research Centre for Future Networks and Communications. A 
primary remit of research of the centre is that of Internet of Things and supporting communication platforms. 
As lead partners of the CONNECT Centre, the TSSG works closely with IBM, Intel , Ericsson and Cisco on 
postgraduate research projects in scope Software Defined Networks and Network Function Virtualisation. 
http://connectcentre.ie/. 
Significant Infrastructure 
The National Cloud Networking testbed 
WIT/TSSG operate the National Cloud Networking testbed which is used by Irish and European SMEs and 
research institutes to develop products in controlled environments. The WIT/TSSG also offer consultancy services 
on the planning and deve lopment of data analytics solutions over a broad range of disciplines, including 
Agriculture, Telecommunications, Social Networking and Health. 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 165 
 
 
The TSSG SDN Testbed consists of physical and virtual SDN equipment as well as a pan -Ireland 4-node SDN 
live deployment built at the optical level and using 10GE as its switching layer. This lets researchers build and test 
new protocols that make large networks work in isolation but with the confidence of working outside of a 
simulation.  
The WIT/TSSG has its own High-Density Water Cooled Data Centre with an Electrical capacity of 300kVA. 
Existing services/ infrastructure available from the Data Centre include: 
• A 40-node OpenStack compute Cloud; 
• A 100TB Hadoop Cluster; 
• A 4-node pan-Ireland 10GE SDN testbed; 
• A 4-node SDR.field deployment over 175 acres; 
• A 6-node physical SDN deployment; 
• A virtual SDN deployment (cloud-based). 
 
Communication equipment for V2X communication 
A V2X communication system (mainly based on the ITS-G5 in the access layer) will be demonstrated in our EU 
project TransSec. The equipment can be utilised to conduct a comparative study between an ITS-G5 based V2X 
communication solution and a 5G solution. In addition, a heterogeneous solution can be studied to combine the 
characters of ITS-G5 (802.11p based DSRC) and 5G (Cellular V2X) to enhance the overall experience of the 
V2X communication. 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 166 
 
4.1.26 YARA INTERNATIONAL ASA 
Short Name YARA  
Country Norway 
Type Industrial 
Number of employees >16.000 
Website www.yara.com  
Short Profile 
Yara International Asa (YARA) is a world-leading fertilizer company and a supplier of environmental solutions 
located in Norway. YARA was founded in 1905 as a solution for the European famine that swept over the continent 
in the early part of the 20th century. Since then,  YARA is continuously developing solutions that improve and 
increase global food pro duction in a sustainable way. Through this expertise, we have also managed to create 
additional environmental solutions that reduce harmful emissions.  
Currently, the company has more than 16,000 employees  and as a truly international company with production, 
sales and services, research and support operations in the Americas, Europe, Africa and Asia.  Yara's knowledge, 
products and solutions grow farmers', distributors' and industrial customers' businesses profitably and responsibly, 
while protecting the ea rth's resources, food and environment. Its fertilizers, crop nutrition programs and 
technologies increase yields, improve product quality and reduce the environmental impact of agricultural 
practices. Its industrial and environmental solutions improve air quality by reducing emissions from industry and 
transportation, and serve as key ingredients in the production of a wide range of goods. YARA fosters a culture 
that promotes the safety of employees, contractors and societies. 
Role in the project 
In 5G-SOLUTIONS, YARA will demonstrate the capabilities of 5G technology to support real-time operation and 
integration support for autonomous assets in a logistics hub at Herøya, Porsgrunn. The smart port will be a hub 
where autonomous assets are received and served with logistics support. The test site will have a 4,5G smart port 
infrastructure in place by 2020, developed in the project Yara Birkeland, integrating a dedicated autonomous vessel 
(Birkeland) with autonomous land -based cargo handling assets. The  UC 3.5 will explore the enhanced service 
offering enabled by 5G technology. 
 
Operation of Herøya port’s autonomous infrastructure (cranes, carriers, energy infrastructure etc) to serve multiple 
(not pre-defined) assets with on - and offloading as well as fuelling/charging and potentially basic maintenance. 
Multi-access cloud applications with assured quality connectivity and handle the integration between the assets to 
provide optimised logistics operations. Safety and security are key priorities in the des ign of the system and will 
be given focus in the development. 
 
YARA will be mainly involved in the Smart Cities & Ports  field trials in an attempt to u nderstand how 5G 
technology can enable autonomous operations in Smart Port and enable the digital factory . In particular, YARA 
will validate in UC 3.5 an autonomous cargo vessel and autonomous land-based cargo logistics handling assets in 
real operations a t Herøya port  over the 5G VINNI Norway facility extended by Herøya 5G RAN node . This 
includes the smart port and logistics to the plant cargo loading area, which will be operated in a mixed traffic 
environment. 
Key Personnel 
Thor Oterholt (Male) hold an MSc in process automation. He has more than 22 years of experience in the design, 
implementation and management of projects related to process control and safety systems for plant and building 
automation. He started his career at Hydro Agri Porsgrunn in 1995 and is moving to the role of discipline lead for 
safety and automations systems at Yara HUB unit in Porsgrunn, after 17 years in the system integration / vendor 
area of the industry.  Experience include FEED, integration, typical development, im plementation, testing and 
staging of various systems. He has also been involved in proposal preparation as system architect and heading off 
technical qualification programs with major customers both at a national and international level. Thor has six years 
of experience in safety and automations systems and associated systems & communications in Chemical and 
Fertilizer industry, six years of experience in Pharmaceutical industry and ten years of experience in Oil & Gas 
industry. 
 
Arve Haavik (Male)  is a Senior System Engineer at YARA since 2015. He holds a MSc degree in Process 
Automation from University of South -Eastern Norway. Arve has worked with extensively with control systems 
and he is also responsible for the production network, some of the applications within this area, and IT Security. 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 167 
 
Previously, he worked at SINTEF for three years as a Research Scientist and has since then been appointed in 
various positions in software and engineering companies. His experience includes planning, design, development, 
testing, and integration of software, engineering, configuration of control systems and Scada systems, network 
design and configuration, IT security, and project management. Arve has worked in delivery projects for both the 
Process Industry and the Healthcare Industry. 
 
Stig Myrland (Male) is a Process System Manager at YARA. He holds two master degrees , one in the field of 
Process Automation from the University of South -Eastern Norway and a Master of Management from BI 
(Norwegian School of Management). Stig has worked in the field of Automation and Process control for more 
than 25 years. His work is a mix of maintenance, engineering, project management, configuration, control systems, 
system architecture, safety systems, IT security and process control. Stig is a Certified Functional Safety Expert 
(CFSE) from Exida. He and his group are responsible to handle all Production IT including plant control and 
production IT infrastructure. Stig also holds the title of Yara’s global expert for Emerson Safety and Automation 
Systems (SAS). 
 
Dr. Cecilie Kjelland (Female) is the Head of Data Privacy. She holds a PhD in International and Comparative 
Law from the University of Freiburg, a LLM from the University of Bochum and she is cand.jur (candidate of 
law) from the University of Oslo. She has worked as an Assistant Professor at the University at Freiburg and has 
been Legal Counsel at Yara International ASA (former Norsk Hydro ASA) since 2001. She was the Secretary to 
the Board from 2006 -2008 and Head of Dat a Privacy since 2017. She has several publications on the field of 
Company law and Corporate Governance, and is frequent speaker at conferences on the field of Data Privacy, 
Governance and Compliance.  Dr. Cecile will serve as YARA’s data privacy single poi nt of contact  in 5G-
SOLUTIONS. 
Relevant Publications 
1. Asle Skredderberget  “The first ever zero emission, autonomous ship ”, Available at: 
https://www.yara.com/knowledge-grows/game-changer-for-the-environment/, 2018. 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 168
4.2 Third parties involved in the project (including use of third-party resources) 
4.2.1 TELECOM ITALIA SPA 
No third parties involved. 
 
4.2.2 ALCATEL-LUCENT ISRAEL LTD  
No third parties involved. 
 
4.2.3 APPART AE NEW TECHNOLOGIES COMPUTER AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
No third parties involved. 
 
4.2.4 APPLIED RESEARCH TO TECHNOLOGIES SRL 
Do you plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core tasks of the action should not be 
sub-contracted) NO 
Do you envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties1  YES 
If yes, please describe the third party, your link to the third party, and describe and justify the foreseen tasks to be 
performed by the third party 
Due to its associative status and its membership structure, A2T will carry out part of its work by using human 
resources provided by a few of its most active corpor ate members, considered as linked third parties within the 
framework of the project. A2T participation in the project will be supported by CRAT as linked third party, which 
traditionally provides the scientific contributions at the basis of Ares2T’s technology transfer activity. 
 
In 5G-SOLUTIONS, the following tasks in which A2T leads or participates will be partially performed by CRAT 
(Consortium for Research in Automation and Telecommunication): 
 
▪ T1.1 Definition and detailed analysis of vertical use cases /scenarios, baseline and corresponding target 
KPIs 
▪ T5.1 LL planning, setup and operational management 
▪ T5.2 LL2 execution: Smart Energy 
▪ T5.4 Performance evaluation and lessons learned 
▪ T9.1 Dissemination and communication activities 
 
The following tasks will be fully performed by A2T: 
 
▪ T2.1 Interfacing and setup of ICT-17 5G E2E facilities to enable LL operation 
▪ T3.3 APIs and interfaces design & development 
▪ T7.2 MLL execution: Concurrent validation of eMBB, mMTC & URLLC service classes from LL1-LL4 
▪ T7.3 Performance evaluation and lessons learned 
▪ T8.1 Market assessment and technology monitoring  
▪ T8.2 Business, marketing plan and sustainability 
▪ T9.2 Involvement of SMEs 
 
The linked third party which will perform the work are listed below and the CVs of their personnel is also provided. 
 
LINKED THIRD PARTY 
Ares2T participation in the project will be supported by CRAT as linked third party, which traditionally provides 
the scientific contributions at the basis of Ares2T’s technology transfer activity. Specifically, in the 5G Solutions 
prot CRAT will provide contributions in the design and simulation of extended control strategies for active demand 
and electric vehicles smart charging. 
                                                 
1 A third party that is an affiliated entity or has a legal link to a participant implying a coll aboration not limited to the action 
(Article 14 of the Model Grant Agreement). 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 169 
 
 
CRAT (Consortium for Research in Automation and Telecommunication) is a no -profit research consortium 
including the University of Rome "La Sapienza", Politecnico di Bari, UniSannio, Thales Alenia Space Italia and 
TopNetwork. In particular, the participation to the project will be in charge of the research group of the University 
of Rome "La Sapienza" coordinated by Prof. Francesco Delli Priscoli  Dr. Alessandro Di Giorgio and will be 
carried out at the Department of Computer, Control and Ma nagement Engineering (DIAG) of the University of 
Rome "La Sapienza". Dr. Alessandro Di Giorgio is also the reference of Ares2T within the University. 
 
 
 
Key Personnel Profiles 
 
Prof. Francesco Delli Priscoli (Male)  is a graduate of Electronic Engineering "summa cum laude" from the 
"Sapienza" University of Rome in 1986. He received the PhD. in system engineering from the "Sapienza" 
University of Rome in 1991. From 1986 to 1991 he worked in the "Studies and Experiment ation" Department of 
Telespazio (Rome). Since 1991 he is working at "Sapienza" University of Rome where, at present, he is Full 
Professor and holds the courses "Automatic Controls" and "Control of Communication and Energy Networks". In 
the framework of his activity, he has mainly researched on resource/service/content management procedures and 
on cognitive techniques for telecommunication and energy networks, by largely adopting control based 
methodologies. He is the author of about 180 papers appeared on major international reviews (about 65), on books 
(about 10) and conferences (about 120) and of five patents. He is an associate editor of Control Engineering 
Practice and a member of the IFAC Technical Committee on "Networked Systems". He was/is the scienti fic 
responsible, at the "Sapienza" University of Rome and CRAT, for more than 30 projects financed by the European 
Union (fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh and eighth framework programmes) or by the European Space Agency (ESA), 
as well as for many national pro jects and co -operations with major industries. His present research interests 
concern closed -loop multi -agent learning techniques for Quality of Experience (QoE) evaluation and QoE 
assurance in advanced communication and energy networks, as well as all related networking algorithms. 
 
Dr Alessandro Di Giorgio (Male) is a Physicist in the field of Electronics and Cybernetics. He received his PhD 
in System Engineering in 2010 at "Sapienza" University of Rome. Since 2007, he has been working at CRAT. 
Since 2011, he is an Assistant Professor in Automatic Control. His research activity deals with the application of 
control systems theory to Smartgrids, with specific focus on active demand, electric vehicles smart charging and 
real time control of power networks. He is author of about 50 scientific papers on major international journals and 
conference proceedings. He has worked in seven research projects founded in Italian and European FP7 and 
Horizon 2020 programs. 
 
The following table provides and indicative distribution of tasks between A2T’s personnel and third linked party: 
 
Implementation by: A2T’s 
personnel 
LINKED THIRD 
PARTY 
 
Task  
T1.1 Definition and detailed analysis of vertical use 
cases/scenarios, baseline and corresponding target KPIs 
✓ (50%) ✓ (50%) 
T2.1 Interfacing and setup of ICT-17 5G E2E facilities to enable 
LL operation 
✓ (100%) - 
T3.3 - APIs and interfaces design & development ✓ (100%) - 
T5.1 LL planning, setup and operational management ✓ (75%) ✓ (25%) 
T5.2 LL2 execution: Smart Energy ✓ (52%) ✓ (48%) 
T5.4 Performance evaluation and lessons learned ✓ (50%) ✓ (50%) 
T7.2 MLL execution: Concurrent validation of eMBB, mMTC & 
URLLC service classes from LL1-LL4 
✓ (100%) - 
T7.3 Performance evaluation and lessons learned ✓ (100%) - 
T8.1 Market assessment and technology monitoring   ✓ (100%) - 
T8.2 Business, marketing plan and sustainability ✓ (100%) - 
T9.1 Dissemination and communication activities ✓ (50%) ✓ (50%) 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 170 
 
T9.2 Involvement of SMEs ✓ (100%) - 
 
Do you envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties (Articles 11 and 12 of 
the General Model Grant Agreement) No 
 
4.2.5 CENTRE TECNOLOGIC DE TELECOMUNICACIONS DE CATALUNYA 
No third parties involved. 
 
4.2.6 CYBERETHICS LAB SRLS 
No third parties involved. 
 
4.2.7 EBOS TECHNOLOGIES LTD 
No third parties involved. 
 
4.2.8 ELLINIKI ETAIRIA TILEPIKOINONION KAI TILEMATIKON EFARMOGON AE 
No third parties involved. 
 
4.2.9 ENEL X SRL  
Do you plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core tasks of the action should not be 
sub-contracted) YES 
If yes, please describe and justify the tasks to be subcontracted 
After careful consideration of the human and technical resources necessary to implement the action, ENEL deems 
necessary to activate subcontracts for the implementation of certain action tasks. More precisely, subcontracting 
is deemed necessary for providing support for analysis/post-processing of data coming from e-Mobility activities 
performed principally in Task 4.3 ‘LL2 Vertical: Energy’ so as to generate reliable inputs to correlated tasks in 
the same Work Package (Task 4.1 ‘LL planning, setup & operat ional management’ and Task 4.4 ‘Performance 
evaluation and lessons learned’) and eventually to other WPs, such as WP8, in which post-processed data will be 
relevant for developing sound business, marketing and sustainability plans. These cleansed and/or analyzed data 
may be employed too, directly or indirectly, in journals and white papers (Task 9.1 ‘Dissemination and 
communication activities’) published together with other partners.  
 
Subcontracting will cover only a limited part of the action as it will r elate to the following task in which ENEL 
participates: 
▪ Task 5.2: LL2 Smart Energy 
 
In these tasks, subcontracting will relate to data analysis service for post -processing of data from e -mobility 
activities in the Energy Living Lab, namely: 
▪ Data handling and cleansing; 
▪ Statistical analyses using suitable statistical methodologies to be shared with ENEL; 
▪ Describe data in terms of key elements relating to the use-case analyzed, for instance power-time curves. 
 
A subcontract will be signed for the above contribution with a single contractor. 
 
It is estimated that the contribution of subcontracting to the implementation of the task in which ENEL will 
activate subcontracting will not exceed the percentage indicated in the table below: 
Task Contribution of subcontracting (in %) 
Task 5.2: LL2 Smart Energy 20% 
 
Subcontracting will amount to €30,000 in total which represents less than 10% of ENEL’s total requested EC 
contribution as part of 5G-SOLUTIONS. 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 171 
 
When subcontracting the above listed tasks, ENEL will award the subcontract ensuring the best value for money 
or, if appropriate, the lowest price. As the best value for money principle does not in all cases require competitive 
selection procedures, when appropriate, ENEL will demonstrate how best value for money was ensured, defining 
quality criteria in ways clear and coherent with the purposes of the action task that is subcontracted. 
 
In doing so, ENEL will avoid any conflict of interests. ENEL will ensure that the majority of the work done by 
the subcontractor(s) (including the work of the main researchers) is located in EU Member States or associated 
countries. ENEL will also make special arrangements regarding results produced by the subcontractors (in order 
to be able to fully comply with their obligations under the Grant Agreement). 
 
Do you envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties  NO 
Do you envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties (Articles 11 and 12 of 
the General Model Grant Agreement)  NO 
 
4.2.10 GLANBIA INGREDIENTS IRELAND DESIGNATED ACTIVITY COMPANY  
No third parties involved. 
 
4.2.11 IBM IRELAND LIMITED  
No third parties involved. 
 
4.2.12 INLECOM GROUP 
No third parties involved. 
 
4.2.13 INSTITUT FUR RUNDFUNKTECHNIK GMBH  
No third parties involved. 
 
4.2.14 IREN SPA 
Do you plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core tasks of the action should not be 
sub-contracted) 
NO 
Do you envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties YES 
If yes, please describe the third party, your link to the third party, and describe and justify the foreseen tasks to be 
performed by the third party 
 
Due to its associative status and its membership structure, IREN SPA (IREN) will carry out part of its wo rk by 
using human resources provided by a few of its subsidiaries (directly or indirectly controlled), considered as linked 
third parties within the framework of the project.  
 
In 5G-SOLUTIONS, the following tasks in which IREN participates will be partially performed by the linked 
third parties: 
 
▪ T5.2 LL2 execution: Smart Energy 
▪ T5.4 Performance evaluation and lessons learned 
▪ T7.2 MLL execution: Concurrent validation of eMBB, mMTC & URLLC service classes from LL1-LL4 
▪ T8.1 Market assessment and technology monitoring  
▪ T8.2 Business, marketing plan and sustainability 
 
The following tasks will be fully performed by IREN: 
 
▪ T1.1 Definition and detailed analysis of vertical use cases/scenarios, baseline and corresponding target 
KPIs 
▪ T5.1 LL planning, setup and operational management 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 172 
 
▪ T7.1 LL planning, setup and operational management 
▪ T7.3 Performance evaluation and lessons learned 
▪ T9.1 Dissemination and communication activities 
 
The linked third parties which will perform part of the work in the above-mentioned tasks are listed below: 
 
LINKED THIRD PARTY 1: IREN Energia 
Iren Energia is the company of IREN S.p.A. working in the electr icity, the heat energy production sector and in 
the technological services sector. 
 
Key Personnel: 
 
Sonia Bertocci (F emale) is a District Heating Development Management assistant in IREN Energia. She is a 
nuclear engineer with over 15 year of experience in District Heating (above all engineering and technical 
standards). She is involved in DH system developing. She is currently working in the Managing Director Technical 
staff for project development. 
 
LINKED THIRD PARTY 2: IREN Mercato 
Iren Mercato is the company of IREN S.p.A. working as Retailer for the sale of electricity, gas and district heating. 
It is also managing the new e-mobility integrated offers. 
 
Key Personnel: 
 
Mario Nicotera (Male) is a Project Manager working in Iren Mercato SpA since October 2018, leading the 
development team of e-mobility project under the brand IrenGO. Mario is an Electrical Engineer with 16 years of 
experience. Previously he worked as a Project Engineer during the construction of a 400MW CCGT power plant; 
as a Project Controller for the development of a program of thermal and renewable power plant (permitting process, 
cost control); and also as a Project Manager for the development of innovative range of EV charging stations and 
relevant services. 
 
Ruggero Gari baldi (Male) is a n E-mobility specialist engineer working in Iren Mercato S.p.A. as technical 
support engineering IRENGO Department. Ruggero is an Electrical Engineer with two years of experience in 
Innovative Hybrid Electrical Ve hicles R&D and 2 years of experience in projecting, testing and validation of 
electrical power plants and storage systems for renewable energy sources applications. 
 
LINKED THIRD PARTY 3: IREN Rinnovabili 
Iren Rinnovabili, through the product line “Iren Smart Solutions”, is the company of IREN S.p.A. specialising in 
building efficiency. The Company designs, finances, installs and manage systems and solutions able to grant its 
clients energy reductions and economic benefits. 
 
Key Personnel: 
 
Gian Paolo Roscio (M ale) is an E lectrical surveyor . He was previously working for Azienda Energetica 
Metropolitana Torino Spa since 1982. Gian served in various positions in Electrical Energy Distribution before 
moving to Public Lighting in 2001 and, since 2003, has taken care of all services for Turin City Council. In 
addition, he w as the coordinator of the extensive activity plan, with special regard for Monumental Lighting, 
created for the Olympic Winter Games. He is currently the Head of Network Services Department. 
 
The following table indicates a preliminary, not binding distribution of tasks between IREN personnel and third 
linked parties: 
Implementation 
by: 
IREN 
personnel 
LINKED 
THIRD 
PARTY 1 
 
LINKED 
THIRD 
PARTY 2 
 
LINKED 
THIRD 
PARTY 3 
 
Task  
T1.1 ✓ (100%) - - - 
T5.1 ✓ (100%) - - - 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 173 
 
T5.2 ✓ (25%) ✓ (25%) ✓ (25%) ✓ (25%) 
T5.4 ✓ (70%) ✓ (10%) ✓ (10%) ✓ (10%) 
T7.1 ✓ (100%) - - - 
T7.2 ✓ (70%) ✓ (10%) ✓ (10%) ✓ (10%) 
T7.3 ✓ (100%) - - - 
T8.1 ✓ (70%) ✓ (10%) ✓ (10%) ✓ (10%) 
T8.2 ✓ (70%) ✓ (10%) ✓ (10%) ✓ (10%) 
T9.1 ✓ (100%) - - - 
 
Do you envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties (Articles 11 and 12 of 
the General Model Grant Agreement)  
NO 
 
4.2.15 IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS, SOCIEDAD LIMITADA  
No third parties involved. 
 
4.2.16 LIVEU LTD 
No third parties involved. 
 
4.2.17 L.M. ERICSSON LIMITED 
No third parties involved. 
 
4.2.18 NORGES TEKNISK-NATURVITENSKAPELIGE UNIVERSITET NTNU 
No third parties involved. 
 
4.2.19 NUROGAMES GMBH  
No third parties involved. 
 
4.2.20 ORBIS MES 
No third parties involved. 
 
4.2.21 PANEPISTIMIO PATRON  
No third parties involved. 
 
4.2.22 PROCTER & GAMBLE SERVICES COMPANY NV 
No third parties involved. 
 
4.2.23 PROMOZIONE PER L INNOVAZIONE FRA INDUSTRIA E UNIVERSITA ASSOCIAZIONE 
No third parties involved. 
 
4.2.24 TENELOR ASA 
No third parties involved. 
 
4.2.25 WATERFORD INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY 
No third parties involved. 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 174 
 
4.2.26 YARA INTERNATIONAL ASA 
No third parties involved. 
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 175 
 
Section 5: Ethics and Security
5.1 Ethics 
The 5G-SOLUTIONS project will support EU’s 5G policy by implementing the last phase of the 5G cPPP roadmap. 
It aims to prove in the field that the 5G capabilities provide ubiquitous access to a wide range of forward -looking 
applications and services with orders of magnitude of improvement over the  current technology and infrastructure, 
thus bringing the 5G vision closer to fulfilment. This will be achieved through conducting advanced field trials of 
innovative use cases, directly involving end-users across five most plausible industry vertical domains (Factories of 
the Future, Smart Energy, Smart Cities , Smart Ports and Media & Entertainment) over 5G end -to-end facilities 
leveraged from ICT-17. To do so, the 5G-SOLUTIONS consortium works directly with telecom operators, leading 
telecom vendors R&D, world leading ICT solution providers , vertical industry leaders acting as end -users, SMEs 
and renowned research organisations/academia. Consequently, in 5G-SOLUTIONS, ethics refer to the involvement 
of human beings in the research process on the one hand, and the processing of personal data throughout the project’s 
lifetime on the other one. 
 
Nevertheless, the 5G-SOLUTIONS project is specifically designed to identify, analyse and integrate a consideration 
of any legal, ethical or social issues raised by the project and solution, and to identify and implement elements which 
would foster trust, usability and social acceptance. In fact, the consideration of these issues, and the embedding of 
privacy- and ethics-by-design, is a key way in which 5G-SOLUTIONS represents progress beyond the start-of-the-
art. Given this, the 5G-SOLUTIONS consortium is committed to show appreciation of potential ethical issues that 
may arise during the course of the project and as such, it has defined a set of procedures on how  to deal with ethics 
in a responsible way. 
 
In addition, concerning risk management and legal compliance, all participants to the project have to be aware of 
their obligations as potential data processers (where appropriate) as well as issues beyond data and info rmation 
protection and privacy described above. Actions should be taken to ensure that those handling subjects identifiable 
or sensitive information are made fully aware of their responsibilities and obligations to respect confidentiality in 
compliance wit h market standards (e.g.: ISO/IEC 27001:2005), best practices and legal requirements under the 
GDPR. In addition to the more general and EU wide guidelines, partners will adhere to and respect national 
regulations and laws. All partners are aware of their responsibilities in that sense and will follow the established rules. 
 
5.1.1 Humans being involvement in the project’s research process  
For example, in relation to informed consent, the consortium will adhere to the following principles. All stakeholder 
engagement activities (pilots, trials, workshops, etc.) will be conducted using fully rational adults, which means that 
they will be in a position to understand their role in the project. Participan ts will be given information on who will 
benefit from their participation in the research and what risk or burden they are undertaking by participating. The 
consortium will also provide information about the potential for commercial exploitation of the res earch. 
Participation in these aspects of the 5G-SOLUTIONS project will be fully voluntary and all participants will be 
given the opportunity to ask questions and receive understandable answers before making decisions about their 
participation. Participants will also have the right to withdraw themselves and their personal data and terminate 
their participation in the research at any time  and will be reminded about their rights before participation. 
Participants will be given this information via an information sheet and be asked to sign a consent form to document 
and verify the information they have been given. During the research, informed consent forms will be used for pilot 
testing and workshops with experts. The 5G-SOLUTIONS Draft Information sheet and i nformed consent form are 
provided in the Optional Annex 3: Ethics supporting document(s). 
 
With specific relation to national ethical requirements, 5G-SOLUTIONS will undertake specific reviews of the 
research to be conducted.  
 
First, 5G-SOLUTIONS will be guided by the ethical codes of all the partners.  
 
Should the EC request national assessments in pilot countries (e.g. Ireland, Belgium, Italy, Greece, Norway)  in 
addition to these mechanisms, the project coordinator will liaise with the Project Officer to identify potential review 
mechanisms. All reviews will include a consideration of the objectives, methodology and potential impact of the 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 176 
 
activities undertaken in the 5G-SOLUTIONS project. This robust review cycle will ensure that the project complies 
with national and European legislation (including privacy and data protection legislation) and with the ethical 
principles associated with research with humans and R esponsible Research and Innovation principles. Task T10.5 
‘Legal and Ethics’ will ensure that project’s research activities and pilot testing are ethically sound and that data 
from research participants is processed according to EU and national regulations  to ensure their privacy. This work 
will culminate in the delivery of the Ethics Protocol for the 5G-SOLUTIONS project, which will be delivered after 
a careful assessment of potential ethical concerns relating to the project’s activities. The Protocol will  comprise of 
ethical evaluation and guidelines, an information sheet and informed consent form, and will outline the ethical 
guidelines to project partners and will present a careful ethical evaluation of the project methodology and its 
compliance with EU and national policy on research ethics and data protection.   
 
Where required, this task will also seek approval from relevant national authorities. However, as many review bodies 
are flooded with requests for review, these procedures will begin at the com mencement of the project, and initial 
guidelines will be provided in M4, with the production of the 5G-SOLUTIONS Ethics Protocol (as part of D10.4 
Report on legal and ethics monitoring), well before the final planning of the solution and the deployment in Living 
Labs (starting in M 13). Throughout the project, the implementation of the Ethics Protocol will be monitored and 
refined including an update on the review procedures.”  
 
5.1.2 Objectives, methodology and impact 
The 5G-SOLUTIONS project includes objectives related to legal, social and ethical analysis. The GDPR introduces 
many new legal requirements that service providers and other stakeholders need to be able to implement in a way 
which is not overly burdensome and provides appropriate user control over data. A consideration of all these issues 
occurs through the respect for responsible research and innovation, research ethics and legal social and ethical issues 
in the project’s objectives.  
 
In 5G-SOLUTIONS, this will occur through a specific consideration of legal, social and ethical issues in relation to 
the project methodology, objectives and impact, via Work package 10 ‘Project management’, and specifically T8.4 
Innovation, data management and IPR activities’ and T10.5 ‘Legal and Ethics’ which identify research ethics and 
data protection requirements respectively. Privacy, data security and societal requirements will also be explicated in 
Task 1.1 ‘Definition and detailed analysis of vertical use cases/scenarios, baseline and corresponding target KPIs’ 
to provide foundational support for examining these issues in the project.  
 
5.1.3 Personal data processing  
All personal data are subject to national and European data protection and security regula tions. 5G-SOLUTIONS 
will address the overall legal framework that is stated in the General Data Protection Regulation (Regulation 
2016/679) on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free 
movement of such data and repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation - GDPR). Also, it will 
consider the relevant procedures for protecting citizens’ rights as reported by EGE and as proclaimed in the Charter 
of Fundamental Rights of the European Union (2000/C 364/01). 
 
Data storage will be secured and access by unwanted third parties will be prevented. Appropriate procedures will be 
applied for data collection (and their usage) and the methodology that will be employed for collecting, using and 
storing various data and information.  
 
Security policies and access management controls will be used in the project using security technologies that will 
record and process timestamped data such as user and device IDs, IP addresses, accessed assets, length of connection, 
etc. Therefore, personal data could be collected during these activities.  
 
As a general rule, the personal data will be processed anonymously and in an aggregated way (personal data collected 
from 5G-SOLUTIONS will be treated as highly confidential, respecting p rivacy) with GDPR-compliancy in mind. 
However, in the eventuality of personal data processing , the subjects involved will provide informed consent, 
expressed in a formal agreement. 5G-SOLUTIONS will collect and process data that are strictly necessary for the 
research. All of the individuals participating in the pilot activities will be volunteers and will have the project data 
collection, storage and processing plans explained to them before the activity begins. Should they wish to exclude 
themselves from the activity, or should they wish their data to be anonymised after the activity, the consortium will 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 177 
 
oblige and write to them to confirm (a) that their wishes have been carried out and (b) precisely how their wishes 
have been carried out. 
 
Moreover, 5G-SOLUTIONS does not involve the processing of genetic information. 
 
Data protection legislation, standards and best practices will be applied on the data collection, storage, protection, 
retention and destruction. The related GDPR-compliant procedures for data collection, storage, protection, retention, 
destruction or re -use as well as data safety procedures will be developed as part of Task  T8.4 ‘Innovation, data 
management and IPR activities’. In addition, Task T10.5 Legal and Ethics led by Carmela Occhipinti (CEL) 5G-
SOLUTIONS’s Legal & Ethics Manager (L&EM) and Data Protection Officer (DPO), in collaboration with partners 
ethical committees and internal data privacy single point of contacts, will support project partners to adopt common 
procedures ensuring that 5G-SOLUTIONS research activities and pilot testing are ethically sound and that data from 
research participants is stored according to EU and national regulations to ensure their privacy. 
 
Most of the documentation associated with these ethi cal and legal reviews are not yet available, nor would it be 
appropriate to approach the relevant experts before the project is funded. However, the consortium is happy to provide 
the draft information sheets consent forms to be used by project in the Optional Annex 3 – Ethics supporting 
documents and will provide the remaining material by the deadlines agreed in the description of Work package 10 
‘Project management’ as part of Task 8.4 and Task 10.5 (deliverables D8.4 and D10.4). The documentation to be 
provided will include:  
▪ Feedback from ethical review activities; 
▪ Revised informed consent forms and project information sheets; 
▪ Any other relevant communications regarding ethical approvals
5.2 Security  
5G-SOLUTIONS will not involve:  
• Activities or results raising security issues;  
• 'EU-classified information' as background or results.  
 
This initial assessment does not preclude a different assessment following the security scrutiny. Should the members 
of the Information and C ommunication Technologies  Programme Committee  consider that 5G -SOLUTIONS 
involves security-related activities or produces outputs that need to be classified, special provisions for classified  
information (as defined in the Commission Rules of Procedure (Decision 2015/444/EC, ECSC, Euratom, and further 
explained in the Guidelines for the classification of research results) will be taken in the grant agreement, as necessary 
and appropriate.
5.3 Declarations from participants regarding Ethics and Security   
5.3.1 TELECOM ITALIA SPA  
TIM abides by its ‘Web Privacy Policy’ which is in accordance with the Regulation 2016/679 / EU (General Data 
Protection Regulation - hereafter GDPR) and Article 122 of the Code regarding the protection of personal dat a 
(Legislative Decree 196/03 , the so-called Privacy Code) and the General Provision of the Guarantor of 8 May 2014, 
and is available online through the following URL: https://www.telecomitalia.com/tit/it/footer/Privacy.html . TIM 
guarantees compliance with the regulations on the protection of personal data, in line with the provisions of the 
Telecom Italia Group Code of Ethics. 
 
5.3.2 ALCATEL-LUCENT ISRAEL LTD  
NOKIA abides by its Privacy and Data protection Policy, which is a confidential document whose principles are 
explained at the following URL: www.nokia.com/en_int/privacy . 
Through this Policy, NOKIA including its affiliates, is committed to respecting citizens’ privacy and to complying 
with applicable data privacy laws. It describes how NOKIA collects and uses personal data where NOKIA is the 
data controller  
 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 178 
 
5.3.3 APPART AE NEW TECHNOLOGIES COMPUTER AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS  
APPART abides by its ‘Information Security & Data Breach Management Plan’ which is in accordance with data 
protection and data security principles. This Policy is a confidential document. 
 
5.3.4 APPLIED RESEARCH TO TECHNOLOGIES SRL  
A2T abides by its Privacy Policy which in line with GDPR law and is available online at the folloiwng URL: 
https://www.ares2t.com/wordpress/privacy-policy/.  
 
5.3.5 CENTRE TECNOLOGIC DE TELECOMUNICACIONS DE CATALUNYA  
CTTC abides by its Provacy Policy which is available online at the following link: http://www.cttc.es/privacy/. 
 
5.3.6 CYBERETHICS LAB SRLS  
CEL abides by its ‘Company ethics and privacy code’ which is confidential.  
 
5.3.7 EBOS TECHNOLOGIES LIMITED  
EBOS abides by its Privacy Policy which is in accordance with the European law and legislation. It is available 
online through the following URL: http://www.ebos.com.cy/privacy-policy .   
 
5.3.8 ELLINIKI ETAIRIA TILEPIKOINONION KAI TILEMATIKON EFARMOGON AE  
FNET abides by its Privacy policy, which is in accordance with the European legislation. It is available for download 
at the following URL: www.nova.gr/gdpr/ 
 
5.3.9 ENEL X SRL  
ENEL abides by its own Code of Ethics which expresses the ethical commitments and responsibilities fulfilled in the 
performance of business activities and corporate operations by the staff members of all the companies of the Enel 
Group, meaning both the executives and the employees, in every sense of the term, of these enterprises. The Code of 
Ethics can be downladed through the following URL: https://www.enel.com/investors/a/2016/08/code-of-ethics . 
 
5.3.10 GLANBIA INGREDIENTS IRELAND DESIGNATED ACTIVITY COMPANY  
GLAN abides by its Privacy Policy which is fully compliant with the EU General Data Protection Regulation General 
Data Protection Regulation [REGULATION (EU) 2016/679]  and is available via: 
https://www.glanbiaingredientsireland.com/privacy-policy . 
 
5.3.11 IBM IRELAND LIMITED  
IBM is committed to the processing of personal information responsibly and in compliance with the applicable data 
protection law in all countries in which it operates (including Ireland). IBM’s Privacy Statement is available online 
at the following URL: https://www.ibm.com/privacy/ie/en/.  
 
5.3.12 INSTITUT FUR RUNDFUNKTECHNIK GMBH  
IRT abides by its Privacy and Data Protection Policy which is accessible through the following URL: 
https://www.irt.de/en/footer/privacy-and-data-protection/. 
 
5.3.13 IREN SPA  
IREN abides by its Privacy Policy which is in accordance with article 13 of Legislative Decree no. 196 of 2003 on 
the processing of personal data 'Code regarding the protection of personal data' and is available at the following URL: 
https://www.gruppoiren.it/cookie-policy.  
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 179 
 
5.3.14 IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS, SOCIEDAD LIMITADA  
IRIS abides by its Privacy Policy available online via http://www.iristechnologygroup.com/privacy-policy/ .  
 
5.3.15 LIVEU LTD  
LIVEU abides by its Privacy Policy available at the following URL: https://www.liveu.tv/privacy-policy . 
  
5.3.16 L.M. ERICSSON LIMITED  
LMI abides by the Privacy Policy of Ericsson  alignining its business with all legal requirements for privacy. In 
addition, LMI’s Privacy Policy is in accordance with a series of clear Ericsson Privacy Principles that form the basis 
of a comprehensive global privacy program.  Ericsson’s privacy principles and Code of Business Ethics are can be 
accessed via https://www.ericsson.com/en/legal/privacy.  
 
5.3.17 NORGES TEKNISK-NATURVITENSKAPELIGE UNIVERSITET NTNU  
NTNU abides by its Code of Ethics which is in accordance with NTNU’s strategy ‘Knowledge for a better world – 
NTNU, internationally outstanding’. NTNU’s Code of Ethics is available online, at the following URL: 
https://innsida.ntnu.no/wiki/-/wiki/English/Code+of+ethics+for+employees+at+NTNU   
 
5.3.18 NUROGAMES GMBH  
NURO abides by its Data Protection and Privacy policy which is available online at the following URL: 
https://www.nuromedia.com/data-protection-privacy/ . 
 
5.3.19 Orbis MES  
OMES abides by its Privacy Policy which is fully compliant with the EU General Data Protection Regulation 
General Data Protection Regulation [REGULATION (EU) 2016/679] and is available from Orbis MES HR 
Department upon request. 
 
5.3.20 PANEPISTIMIO PATRON  
UoP abides by its Privacy Policy which is in accordance with the European and Greek law (Ν. 2472/1997 regarding 
processing of personal data protection).  
 
5.3.21 PROCTER & GAMBLE SERVICES COMPANY NV  
PGBS abides by its ‘Global Consumer Privacy Policy’ which is in line with GDPR and available at the following 
URL: https://www.pg.com/privacy/english/privacy_statement.shtml .  
 
5.3.22 TENELOR ASA  
TNOR abides by its Privacy Policy which is line with the EU laws and the company’s privacy principles available at 
the following URL: https://www.telenor.com/sustainability/responsible-business/privacy-and-data-
protection/understanding-our-privacy-position/ . 
 
5.3.23 WATERFORD INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY  
WIT/TSSH abides by its Privacy Policy ‘TSSG Web and Online Privacy Statement’ which is in accordance with the 
Data Protection Acts, 1988 and 2003 and with EU General Data Protection Regulation 2018 .  More information is 
available on: https://www.tssg.org/privacy-policy/.  
 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 180 
 
5.3.24 YARA INTERNATIONAL ASA  
YARA abides by its ‘Data Privacy Directive for Customer, Supplier and Business Partner Data’ which is available 
at the following URL:  https://www.yara.com/globalassets/privacy-policy/2018-03-06-yara-data-privacy-directive-
for-customer-data-public-version-final.pdf/. 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 181 
 
Annex 1: 5G-SOLUTIONS External Advisory Board 
The following table provides information about the members of the External Advisory Board (EAB). 
# Name & Position Profile 
1 Ms. Afrodite Sevasti (F), Chief 
Technology Officer, Greek 
Research & Technology Network 
(GRNET), Athens, Greece 
Dr. Afrodite Sevasti holds the position of Chief Technology Officer at 
the Greek Research and Technology Network (GRNET) S.A. She is also 
a member of the GEANT (GN3) Project Management Team, 
coordinating the multi-domain network service research activities. Prior 
to joining GRNET, she has worked as an R&D Computer Engineer for 
several years at the RA Computer Technology Institute (Greece). Dr. 
Afrodite graduated from the Computer Engineering and Informatics 
Department of Patras University, Greece, where she also received her 
PhD in the field of QoS enhancements on IP-based networks. She also 
holds an MSc degree on Computer Science from the same department 
and an MSc degree in Information Networking from the Information 
Networking Institute of Carnegie Mellon University. 
2 Delphine Bernet-Travert (F), 
Secretary General, Independent 
Regulators Group (IRG), 
Brussels, Belgium 
Delphine is the Head of the Independent Regulators Group (IRG) 
Secretariat in Brussels, which was established in 1997 as a group of 
European National Telecommunications Regulatory A uthorities 
(NRAs) to share experiences and points of views among its members on 
important issues relating to the regulation and development of the 
European telecommunications market . Delphine is a Senior Brussels-
based lobbyist with Project management skills and more than 10 years’ 
experience in EU and Public & Government Affairs inc luding 
communication. Her specific areas of expertise are focused in various 
sectoral policies of the EU (Regional/Interregional cooperation, 
Agriculture, Telecoms, External Rel ations and Development, EU 
Industrial Policy, EU 2020). 
3 Prof. Nicola Blefari Melazzi 
(M), Director, National Inter-
University Consortium for 
Telecommunications, (CNIT), 
Parma, Italy 
Dr. Nicola is a Full Professor of Telecommunications to the University 
of Roma “Tor Vergata”. Since January 2017, he is the Director of CNIT 
(National Inter-University Consortium for Telecommunications) a non-
profit Consortium among 37 Italian Universities, in cluding also 6 
research units belonging to institutes of the National Research Council 
(CNR). CNIT also operates four national laboratories. More than 1,300 
people, belonging to the participating universities, collaborate with 
CNIT, while the number of employees is more than 100. CNIT revenues 
(about 18M€ per year) come only from private companies and 
competitive funding programs.  CNIT is participating in 32 H2020 
projects and coordinates 8 of them.  In addition, he is a member of the 
Data Protection Supervisory Authority of the European Space Agency. 
Previously, he also participated in the European Technology Platform 
“NetWorld2020″ as an elected member of the Steering Board. Between 
2013 and 2016 he was also elected as a member of the 5G Infrastructure 
Association and of the 5G Public Private Partnership. 
4 Moisès Morató-Güell (M), 
Energy Area Manager, Agencia 
de Ecología Urbana de Barcelona 
(BCNecologia), Barcelona, Spain 
Moisès is the Manager of the Energy Area in BCNecologia (the Urban 
Ecology Agency of Barcelona) , a public consortium consisting of the 
City Council of Barcelona, the Municipal Council and Metropolitan 
Area of Barcelona and the Barcelona Provincial Council. BCNecologia 
has done projects for various public insti tutions, foundations, 
organisations and companies, both nationally and internationally.  
BCNecologia applies a systemic approach to the management of cities 
to encourage a more sustainable model. In order to achieve this, the 
agency provides sustainable solutions related to mobility, energy, waste 
management, water management, urban planning, biodiversity and 
social cohesion.  
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 182 
 
Moisès is an Industrial Engineer from the Technical Superior School of 
Engineers of Barcelona (ETSEIB)  and an expert in energy and ur ban 
systems. His main research interests include energy rating, renewable 
resources, risk prevention and sustainable development projects. He 
holds the following diplomas and certifications: Postgraduate of 
Specialisation in Energy Rating (UNESCO), 2006 , Masters in the 
Management of Renewable Energies (ICT) 2002, Postgraduate diploma 
in Occupational Risk Prevention (FOMENT del TREBALL), 1998 and 
Postgraduate diploma in reconstruction of traffic accidents (UPC), 
1997. As a scientist and inventor, Moisès competed in the creation of 
the first solar vehicle in the Spanish state (Despertaferro) and also in the 
race for solar vehicles "Sunrace 2000" (Australia) , and in addition he 
created new software for Solar Modelling in urban areas 
(www.cercasol.com). Moisès  has served as a Coordinator for 
sustainable development projects.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 183 
 
Annex 2: Letters of Support from the  5G-SOLUTIONS EAB 
Members 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 184 
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 185 
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 186 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 187 
 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 188 
 
Annex 2B: 5G-VINNI Support Proposal for ICT-19 projects  
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
G                                                                                                                                                   Page 189 
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
                                                                                                                                                      Page 190 
Annex 3: Ethics Supporting Documents  
 
5G-SOLUTIONS Draft Information sheet and informed consent form 
Information Sheet           [Date] 
 
 
5G Solutions for European Citizens 
 
I consent to participate in the European Union-funded1 5G-SOLUTIONS research project coordinated by Telecom, 
Italia SPA, Italy in partnership with [Insert NAME of the INSTITUTION2]. I am aware that the purpose of this project 
is to conduct advanced field trials of thematically diverse digital services that require 5G capabilities in the vertical 
domains of Factories of the Future, Smart Energy, Smart Cities, Smart Ports and Media & Entertainment, directly 
engaging end-user actors, so as to validate the technological performance of 5G technology in successfully being 
able to serve them, as well as the business potential of such use cases prior to commercial deployment.  
The findings of this survey / interview / workshop / field trial / group discussion / other 
(Specify:………………………..)3 will assist the project partners  to assess and validate the technological and 
business performance of 5G through innovative use cases in the aforementioned domains. I understand that any 
personal data I provide will be handled according to the legal requi rements outlined in the General Data Protection 
Regulation (Directive 95/46/EC). 
I understand that I am participating in this research voluntarily and that I am free to leave at any time, without any 
impacts on me or my future participation in the project.  I am also aware that I am free to refuse to answer any 
questions or provide any information that I do not wish to discuss. I understand that I have the right to ask questions 
and receive understandable answers before making any decision.  
 
I understand that the record of my involvement in the research will be kept confidential. I have been informed that 
everything I say will be anonym ized. The event data will be recorded via paper notes/electronic notes/voice 
recorder/camera recorder4 and I understand that I can request a copy of these records to review if I wish. I understand 
that I am also allowed to delete or make any changes to these records if I feel the information I provided could be 
improved or clarified. I understand that information about my personal involvement in the research will be kept in a 
secure location at TELECOM ITALIA SPA and that my information will be made anonymous when shared with 5G-
SOLUTIONS project team. I understand that the data I provide will be anonymised and the record of my participation 
will be kept in a file separate from the project data. I understand that the data will be kept for one year after the 5G-
SOLUTIONS project ends, but my personal data will be destroyed when the project ends. 
 
I understand that this research conforms to European Commission guidelines and that it has been approved by the 
Ethics Committee in the Research Executive Agency managing Horizon 2020 projects. Finally, I have b een given 
the contact details of the research team and I have been informed that I am free to contact TELECOM ITALIA SPA 
(Project Coordinator) about any queries relating to my data or the project itself: 
 
TELECOM ITALIA SPA 
Corso d’Italia, 41 - 00198 
Rome, Italy 
T. + 39 06 36881 
 
                                                           
1 Grant agreement number XXXX 
2 5G-SOLUTIONS partner conducting the research and innovation activity will amend all highlighted parts 
3 Strike through options that do not apply. 
4 Strike through options that do not apply. 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
                                                                                                                                                      Page 191 
 
Informed consent 
 
 
5G Solutions for European Citizens 
 
Lead partners: [Insert name of person/institution conducting the research activity] 
Participant Identification Number for this project:                                                 Please  ✓  box 
 
1. I confirm that I have read and understand the information sheet  
dated [insert date] explaining the above research project and I have had the 
opportunity to ask questions about the project. 
 
2. I understand that my participation is purely voluntary and that I am free to 
withdraw at any time without giving any reason and without there being any 
negative consequences. In addition, should I not wish to answer any particular 
question or questions, I am free to decline and can contact Project Coordinator 
TELECOM ITALIA SPA via telephone at T. + 39 06 36881. 
  
3. I understand that my responses and my personal data will be kept strictly 
confidential.  
 
4. I give permission for members of the project team to have access to my 
anonymised data. I understand that my name will not be linked with 
the research materials, and I will not be identified or identifiable in the 
report or reports that result from the research.   
  
5.    I agree to take part in the above research project. 
 
 
 
_____________________               ________________                ____________________ 
Name of Participant                               Date                                       Signature 
(or legal representative) 
 
_________________________       ________________                  ____________________ 
Name of person taking consent                    Date                           Signature 
(if different from lead researcher) To be signed and dated in presence of the participant  
 
________________________                ________________          ____________________ 
 Lead Researcher                                        Date                           Signature 
To be signed and dated in presence of the participant 
 
Copies: 
Once this has been signed by all parties the participant should receive a copy of the signed and dated participant 
consent form, the letter/pre -written script/information sheet and any other written information provided to the 
participants. A copy of the signed and dated consent form should be placed in the project’s main record  (e.g. a site 
file), which must be kept in a secure location.  
 
This proposal version was submitted by Frini LAZAROU on 14/11/2018 13:54:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
 
Commission européenne/Europese Commissie, 1049 Bruxelles/Brussel, BELGIQUE/BELGIË - Tel. +32 22991111 
 
 
  
 
This electronic receipt is a digitally signed version of the document submitted by your 
organisation. Both the content of the document and a set of metadata have been digitally 
sealed. 
This digital signature mechanism, using a public-private key pair mechanism, uniquely 
binds this eReceipt to the modules of the Participant Portal of the European 
Commission, to the transaction for which it was generated and ensures its full integrity. 
Therefore a complete digitally signed trail of the transaction is available both for your 
organisation and for the issuer of the eReceipt. 
Any attempt to modify the content will lead to a break of the integrity of the electronic 
signature, which can be verified at any time by clicking on the eReceipt validation 
symbol. 
More info about eReceipts can be found in the FAQ page of the Participant Portal. 
(http://ec.europa.eu/research/participants/portal/page/faq)