2.1 AE IZCT IZ Circular Textiles Gmbh DE 873039092 
3 BEN ARIS ARISTENG SARL LU 890617044 
4 BEN RECY RECYC ELIT SAS FR 898416620 
5 BEN RESOR REGENERATION BE 893491348 
6 BEN IOM LEIBNIZ-INSTITUT FUR 
OBERFLACHENMODIFIZIERUNG EV 
DE 968926308 
7 BEN CEF STICHTING CIRCLE ECONOMY NL 939754528
7.1 AE CGS Circularity Gap Solutions B.V. NL 877344631 
8 BEN CEA COMMISSARIAT A L ENERGIE ATOMIQUE ET 
AUX ENERGIES ALTERNATIVES 
FR 999992401 
The EU generates 12.6 million tonnes of textile waste per year, with only 22% currently collected for reuse or recycling 
—the rest often incinerated or landfilled. With mandating separate textile collection across the EU by 2025, the collected 
amount is expected to increase and we must upscale sorting and recycling capacity and efficiency to ensure sustainable 
recovery of the material. SORT4CIRC’s overall ambition is to improve value creation and cost efficiency through 
automated sorting and innovative recycling. This will generate new revenue streams for sorters and recyclers by turning 
non-re-wearable textiles into valuable feedstock for high -value recycling. The project will strive to unlock the current 
technological gaps for textile identification and value-chain traceability, while providing an overall sound business case 
driving circularity within the textile value chain (TVC). The use of modern digital technology in the sorting process will 
make it easier to achieve comprehensive information of the materials and fabrication process steps and integrate it to 
automated presorting and sorting for recycling processes. The different & complementary techonolgies are interlinked 
with each other with interoperable architecture to achieve complete traceability. Results generated are cross-checked to 
ensure reliability and consistency, to make decision over its optimal channel for reuse or recycling. SORT4CIRC gathers 
all relevant expertise to develop a systemic transformative solution enabling a traceable, circular textile industry: 
industrial collector and sorter, design for recycling by allowing disassembly, technology developers (machine learning, 
Artificial Intelligence (AI), imaging, hyperspectral, NIR, multisensors), recyclers (chemical, thermo -mechanical and 
mechanical), along with specialists in supply chain traking and tracing, digital passports, blockchain technology and 
IoT, textile business models, trade and LCC/LCA. 
Project summary 
Grant Preparation (General Information screen) — Provide an overall description of your project (including context and overall 
objectives, planned activities and main achievements, and expected results and impacts (on target groups, change procedures, 
capacities, innovation etc)). This summary should give readers a clear idea of what your project is about. 
Use the project summary from your proposal. 
Project: 101181988 — SORT4CIRC — HORIZON-CL6-2024-CIRCBIO-02 
4 
 
 
 
 
 
PARTICIPANTS 
Grant Preparation (Beneficiaries screen) — Enter the info. 
Number Role Short name Legal name Country PIC 
9 BEN SEM SEMSO FR 876371333 
10 BEN PURFI PURFI MANUFACTURING BELGIUM BE 887835957 
11 BEN PSB PARIS SCHOOL OF BUSINESS FR 944056866 
12 BEN TRA TEXTILE RECYCLING ASSOCIATION LIMITED UK 878690991 
13 BEN IRIS IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS, SOCIEDAD 
LIMITADA 
ES 998993786 
14 BEN REFA reverse.fashion GmbH DE 878874321 
15 BEN TXHO TEXTILE HOUSE FOR EURO TRADE, S.R.O. SK 870613413 
Project: 101181988 — SORT4CIRC — HORIZON-CL6-2024-CIRCBIO-02 
5 
 
 
LIST OF WORK PACKAGES 
 
Work packages 
Grant Preparation (Work Packages screen) — Enter the info. 
Work 
Package No 
Work Package name Lead Beneficiary Effort 
(Person- 
Months) 
Start 
Month 
End 
Month 
Deliverables 
WP1 Management 1 - CU  1 36 D1.1 – Project Management Plan 
D1.2 – Data Management Plan 
D1.3 – Project meeting minutes and 
decision records M1-M18 
D1.4 – Data Management Plan M18 
D1.5 – Project meeting minutes and 
decision records M18-M24 
D1.6 – Project meeting minutes and 
decision records M24-M36 
D1.7 – Data Management Plan M36 
WP2 Pre-sorting & textile classification 9 - SEM  1 24 D2.1 – Development of a complete machine 
for PSFS 
D2.2 – Sorting system for PSFS 
D2.3 – Automated detection for a PSFS 
garment sorting system 
D2.4 – Usage Guidelines 
D2.5 – Summaries of Learning and 
Deployment Insights 
WP3 Textile recognition for automatic sorting in real- 
time 
13 - IRIS  1 24 D3.1 – Report on characterisation of textile 
samples 
D3.2 – Report on the selection of best 
techniques for the recognition of complex 
garments 
D3.3 – Multirange Spectroscopic smart 
sensing system 
D3.4 – Eco-design guidelines and report on 
the process to recognise DfD garments 
Project: 101181988 — SORT4CIRC — HORIZON-CL6-2024-CIRCBIO-02 
6 
 
 
 
Work packages 
Grant Preparation (Work Packages screen) — Enter the info. 
Work 
Package No 
Work Package name Lead Beneficiary Effort 
(Person- 
Months) 
Start 
Month 
End 
Month 
Deliverables 
      D3.5 – Tests report 
WP4 Textile DPP 1 - CU  1 36 D4.1 – TTRFID assessment 
D4.2 – TTRFID design and selection 
guideline 
D4.3 – DPP development guidelines 
D4.4 – DPP smart contract guidelines for 
PSFS & PSSR compatibility 
D4.5 – Tokenised Ecosystem framework 
analysis and development guideline 
D4.6 – DfD solution development over DPP 
framework 
D4.7 – Guidelines for recyclability and 
reusability 
WP5 Demonstrator 15 - TXHO  19 36 D5.1 – TTRFID technology deployment 
D5.2 – DPP Blockchain demonstration 
deployment with tokenised LCA assessment 
dashboard 
D5.3 – Automatised PSFS pilot 
D5.4 – Upgrade Automatised Sorting Line 
D5.5 – Validation of Sorted Feedstock 
D5.6 – Successful recycling of sorted 
feedstock 
WP6 Technical and economic feasibility, environmental 
and social assessment, design and efficiency 
improvement 
11 - PSB  1 36 D6.1 – Data collection for SORT4CIRC 
D6.2 – Report on environmental impact 
assessment 
D6.3 – Report on cost-benefit analysis 
D6.4 – Report on the BM settings 
D6.5 – Report on the efficient design and 
operation of the automated sorting system 
Project: 101181988 — SORT4CIRC — HORIZON-CL6-2024-CIRCBIO-02 
7 
 
 
 
Work packages 
Grant Preparation (Work Packages screen) — Enter the info. 
Work 
Package No 
Work Package name Lead Beneficiary Effort 
(Person- 
Months) 
Start 
Month 
End 
Month 
Deliverables 
      D6.6 – Holistic technology benchmarking 
among different textile sorting processes 
D6.7 – Public report on environmental 
impact assessment 
WP7 Communication, Dissemination, and Exploitation 7 - CEF  1 36 D7.1 – Communication, Dissemination, and 
Exploitation Plan M3 
D7.2 – SORT4CIRC Brand Book 
D7.3 – SORT4CIRC website 
D7.4 – Communication, Dissemination, and 
Exploitation Plan M12 
D7.5 – SORT4CIRC policy briefing 
document M18 
D7.6 – Communication, Dissemination, and 
Exploitation Plan M36 
D7.7 – SORT4CIRC circular textiles 
toolbox 
D7.8 – SORT4CIRC policy briefing 
document M36 
D7.9 – Report on capacity building 
webinars 
D7.10 – Summary of clustering activties 
Project: 101181988 — SORT4CIRC — HORIZON-CL6-2024-CIRCBIO-02 
8 
 
 
Work package WP1 – Management 
 
Work Package Number WP1 Lead Beneficiary 1 - CU 
Work Package Name Management 
Start Month 1 End Month 36 
 
Description 
T1.1: Strategic & technical project management [CU, WP leaders] (M1-M36) 
This task is dedicated to the strategic and technical management of the project, including the coordination of partners 
through governing bodies animation, WPs follow-up, progress monitoring (cost and time), assessment of the quality of 
the results and their impact, and, if necessary, application of contingency plans. It also covers relationships with relevant 
stakeholders beyond participant organisations (EC, Advisory Board - see 3.2, other projects, etc.), as needed by the 
project to guarantee its success, impact, and leverage effect. 
The results of Task 1.1 will be reported in D1.3, D1.5 and D1.6. 
T1.2: Administrative, financial, and contractual coordination [CU, WP leaders] (M1-M36) 
This task comprises all legal, financial, and administrative activities within the project, both among the partners and 
concerning the relationship with the EC. CU will oversee the contractual and administrative management of the project: 
Management of the Grant Agreement (including amendment requests); Keeping updated the Consortium Agreement, 
especially know-how and access right management; Managing partner’s access and withdrawal together with governing 
bodies. 
CU will also oversee financial reporting: Handling grant provided by EC regarding distribution between partners and 
activities; A 6M-reporting (both from technical and financial aspects will be proposed) synchronised with annual and 
mid-year reviews; Maintaining a day-to-day relationship with partners and answering requests regarding cost eligibility, 
financial reporting, and official process for fund transfer; Ensuring payments to all partners in due time.  
In addition, the activities of the ethics mentor willbe included in the Periodic technical reports. 
The results of Task 1.1 will be reported in D1.3, D1.5 and D1.6. 
T1.3: Internal communication [CU, WP leaders] (M1-M36) 
In this task, CU will promote efficient communication flows within the consortium. The consortium will have access to a 
SharePoint platform for efficient project information flow. Official documents, templates, working documents, technical 
and financial progress reports will be available on that platform. They will be accessible to partners with different levels 
of responsibility (partner, WP leader, guests, users). 
The results of Task 1.1 will be reported in D1.3, D1.5 and D1.6. T1.4: 
Quality assurance, data and risk management [CU] (M1-M36) 
CU will set a quality management policy covering all aspects related to practical management (document exchanges & 
internal workflows) of the project. It will rule the risk management plan and associated contingency plans, the critical 
path of the project monitoring, communication and quality control activities, gender indicators according to the Gender 
Equality Plan, internal processes related to standards of documents, proof-reading, validation workflow for the approval 
of deliverables, reports, dissemination, exploitation and IPR items, etc. Key indicators will also be proposed to evaluate 
the project performance and impact. In parallel, CU will establish data management procedures describing how project 
data will be handled, what data will be collected, processed, or generated, and methodologies and standards followed  
Objectives 
• To ensure smooth collaboration and integration of all partners applying methodologies and tools for efficient 
implementation of activities as well as ensuring decision-making and steering within governing bodies; 
• To anticipate, monitor and assess project progress vs. work plan and initiate, if necessary, prompt corrective actions 
and assure timely reporting and communication with the Project Officer and the EC;  
• To guarantee a maximised collaborative leverage effect and benefits for the consortium and the EC; 
• To implement a performing risk and quality management as well as efficient data management. 
CU will be the Project Coordinator (PCo) and lead global project coordination (strategic, contractual, animation, 
communication, reporting, etc.). 
Project: 101181988 — SORT4CIRC — HORIZON-CL6-2024-CIRCBIO-02 
9 
 
 
 
 
 
Work package WP2 – Pre-sorting & textile classification 
 
Work Package Number WP2 Lead Beneficiary 9 - SEM 
Work Package Name Pre-sorting & textile classification 
Start Month 1 End Month 24 
 
Description 
T2.1: Maturing AI -based vision detection system for Garment PSFS and developing textile classifications that are 
interoperable with the second-hand market [REFA, TXHO] (M1-M24) 
T2.1.1: Automated AI-Based PSFS System for Garment Attributes 
REFA’s sorting technology accurately scans and identifies garment types, wear conditions, style, brands, colours, fabric 
construction and sizes through AI -based image analysis. Feeding the conveyor belt with the garments by placing them 
unfolded on it. This technology will be taken as a basis for this WP. REFA will improve and adapt the AI technology 
to increase its a ccuracy and efficiency. This will involve refining the AI algorithms, improving image processing 
capabilities, and enchaining overall system i ntegration. By the end of the project, the AI -based PSFS system will be 
significantly optimised. This will result in a more efficient, accurate, and scalable solution for garment PSFS, benefiting 
the sorting and textile industries. 
T2.1.2: Development of a SKU retrieval system 
REFA builds on existing AI algorithms and further develops them to recognise individual products and infer their SKU 
based on image similarity. REFA is creating a database of image feature vectors that links image embeddings to product 
data. Through the additional product data that can be processed in the sorting decision, the sorting quality can be 
significantly inc reased. This is particularly useful for sorting unique and high -value garments that would otherwise 
require economically unfeasible sorting steps. 
The results of T2.1.1 and T2.1.2 will be reported in D2.3, D2.4 and D2.5. 
T2.2: Development of an integrated semi-automated garment PSFS [SEM, TXHO] (M1-M20) 
SEM will develop an integrated automated system design for the PSFS, encompassing both the automatic recognition and 
separation of garment types. TXHO will contribute to this process by providing access to its logistics and sorting lines 
for practical testing and supplying a collection of pre-sorted garments across 15 article classes in various quality levels to 
support the development and validation of the designed system. 
The results of Task 2.2 will be reported in D2.2. 
T2.3: Development of a complete machine consisting of PSFS system [SEM, REFA, TXHO] (M1-M12) 
SEM will combine the components developed for the new type of PSFS and build a compact all-in-one solution 
from them. The requirements, such as available space and the existing manual sorting line, will be considered. REFA 
and TXHO will support SEM in integrating their process technology into the overall system with the IT interfaces, 
documentation of the system control, and technical assistance with the installation of the hardware. 
The results of Task 2.3 will be reported in D2.1. 
regarding sharing, duration, and preservation, ensuring full compliance with open science policy. The procedures will 
be gathered in a Data Management Plan to be submitted to the EC in M6 with regular updates. 
The results of Task 1.4 will be reported in D1.1, D1.2, D1.4 and D1.7. 
Objectives 
• Develop the automatic recognition of garment types further and make detection quality more robust. 
• Develop models to evaluate the degree of soiling and wear condition with a perspective of interoperability with the 
second-hand market further. 
• Develop a SKU retrieval system to access product data without requiring a visible or accessible identifier. 
• Identifying and addressing data gaps in the textile industry to enhance transparency and traceability throughout the 
TVC. 
Project: 101181988 — SORT4CIRC — HORIZON-CL6-2024-CIRCBIO-02 
10 
 
 
Work package WP3 – Textile recognition for automatic sorting in real-time 
 
Work Package Number WP3 Lead Beneficiary 13 - IRIS 
Work Package Name Textile recognition for automatic sorting in real-time 
Start Month 1 End Month 24 
 
Description 
Description of work 
T3.1: Definition of textile typologies to be studied, collection of textile waste samples and characterisation and creation 
of complex textiles databases [TXHO, RECY, PURFI, CEA] (M1-M06) 
TXHO will define an action plan to collect the different textile residues, including collection, transportation, storage and 
logistics. Dirty samples from PCT complex waste (from all types of garments with interest for recyclers) will be collected 
by TXHO. Clean textile samples will be collected, characterised and used for the tests. CEA will use a database of clean 
samples from previous projects to develop models capable of estimating the composition of garments and to validate 
the results obtained through the techniques tested in the following tasks. PURFI and RECY will provide specifications 
to drive the development of the technology. 
The results of Task 3.1 will be reported in D3.1. 
T3.2: Selection of best techniques for the recognition of complex textiles and development of chemometric, AI and ML 
models [CEA, IOM, IRIS] (M1-M18) 
T3.2.1: Selection of optical techniques for identification of complex textiles: CEA, IOM and IRIS will study a 
comprehensive series of spectroscopic techniques for detecting complex parameters in garments. CEA and IOM will 
focus on certain aspects of the s pectroscopic problems that must be solved. CEA will extensively test the performance 
of the MWIR camera for carbon black textiles, which is assumed to have potential due to its wavelength range being far 
away from the VIS range. CEA will optimise the SWIR HSI technique to detect low-content materials (<3%). IOM will 
test the performance of NIR imaging and spectroscopy and the potential of other spectroscopic techniques, such as 
Raman. IRIS will study the identification of complex compositions of multilayer garments through NIR hyperspectral 
imaging and DfD solutions (Smart Stitch ™), i.e. NIR tackled by the project, as well as foreign materials with metallic 
parts (zippers, buttons, etc.) through LIBS. 
T3.2.2: Development of chemometric, AI and ML models: CEA, IOM and IRIS will develop chemometric models based 
on AI and statistical aspects for extracting actionable information from the spectroscopic data capable of accurately 
identifying complex textile waste through the selected optical techniques selected in subtask T3.2.1.  
The results of T3.2.1 and T3.2.2 will be reported in D3.2. 
T3.3: Development of a cost -effective and reliable inline multirange spectroscopic smart sensing system for the 
recognition of complex textiles in real-time [IRIS, TXHO, CEA, IOM] (M19-M24) 
T3.3.1: Development of an inline Multirange Spectroscopic smart sensing system: IRIS will develop a multirange 
spectroscopic platform incorporating the most suitable optical techniques for relevant parameters for proper sorting.  
CEA, IOM and IRIS will commonly evaluate the specific informative value of the results obtained by the various 
spectroscopic methods for final decision -making in the sorting process and derive from that evaluation the optimum 
configuration of methods to be  implemented in the VISUM Fusion multirange spectroscopic platform. Once the 
chemometric models are built through T3.2.2 and lab -tested and validated through FAT, this task will culminate with 
the sensing system being installed in the pilot unit in WP5. In addition to multivariate data from spectroscopy analysers, 
univariate data from available traditional sensors installed in the pilot unit in WP5 will also be assessed to explore the 
data fusion opportunities. 
T3.3.2: Data Management platform and predictive modelling: In this task, IRIS, will develop a data management platform 
whereby data will be acquired from the Multirange Spectroscopic smart sensing system and traditional sensors. IRIS 
will adapt its current Scadalytics software for the data collection, storage, fusion and processing.  
Objectives 
• Studies and selection of the most adequate optical techniques for recognising complex textiles. 
• Leveraging a novel Multirange Spectroscopic Platform to design and develop the most suitable spectroscopic 
configuration to be engineered into a compact and affordable inline device for the real -time monitoring of the textiles’ 
critical parameters, overcoming the limitations of current NIR technology. 
• Develop a process to recognise DfD garments and sort disassembled pieces. 
Project: 101181988 — SORT4CIRC — HORIZON-CL6-2024-CIRCBIO-02 
11 
 
 
The results of T3.3.1 and T3.3.2 will be reported in D3.3. 
T3.4. Recognition of DfD solutions of garments with Smart Stitch ™ technology and automated assessment of 
disassembly efficiency while sorting by composition after smart disassembly [RESO, IRIS]. (M6 -M24) 
T3.4.1: Recognition of DfD eco -design prototypes: RESO and IRIS will study the best method(s) of identification 
techniques (RFID, NIR, RGB) that could be coupled with AI for Smart Stitch ™ identification, fulfilling speed and 
accuracy requirements (500 kg/hour infeed, >95% accuracy) and will work on an effective pre -sorting assessment 
(categories, integration in the ecosystem chain, automation level). RESO will work as well on a Failure Mode and Effects 
Analysis (FMEA) and risk assessment, and they will test  the speed, efficiency and accuracy of the system developed 
and validate the device in the relevant environment. 
T3.4.2: Automated assessment of disassembly efficiency while sorting by composition after Smart Disassembly ™: 
RESO will work on the integration of method(s) in machinery after the Smart Disassembly™ process to assess effective 
disassembly while sorting in mono-material streams. With the support of IRIS, the best method(s) of identification (NIR, 
RGB with AI, electromagnetic sensors…) that fulfil speed and accuracy requirements (500 kg/h infeed, >95% accuracy) 
will be studied. The acceptance criteria (sorting categories, purity level, type of flow, speed, accuracy…) will be defined. 
FMEA and risk assessment will be performed, and the speed, efficiency and accuracy of the system will be tested and 
validated. 
The results of T3.4.1 and T3.4.2 will be reported in D3.4. 
T3.5. Validation by recyclers [RECY, PURFI] (M18-M24) 
RECY will validate, at a laboratory scale, if the composition of the four families (PET/PA; PET/EA: PET/cotton; 
multilayers) of feedstocks sorted by TXHO matches the specifications provided in T3.1 (polyester content). Co-materials 
will be analysed to validate the composition and absence of any contaminants. PURFI will validate if the composition 
of cotton feedstocks matches with the specifications provided in T3.1. 
The results of Task 3.5 will be reported in D3.5. 
 
 
Work package WP4 – Textile DPP 
 
Work Package Number WP4 Lead Beneficiary 1 - CU 
Work Package Name Textile DPP 
Start Month 1 End Month 36 
 
 
Objectives 
• Develop a customised TTRFID tag model specifically for eco-friendly and recyclable textiles. 
• Design an adaptable/scalable blockchain architecture for the traceability of textile data over the TVC ecosystem. 
• Integrate DPP data retrieval with automated PSFS & PSSR systems for textile recycling solutions. 
• Establish a tokenised ecosystem over the TVC to incentivise sustainable practices. 
• Implement DfD solutions to enhance textile recycling and reuse. 
Description 
Description of work 
T4.1: Development of a TTRFID tag model [CU, PURFI, RECY] (M1-M12) 
T4.1.1. TTRFID technology assessment and developing design and selection guidelines: CU will assess existing RFID 
tag technologies to identify the most suitable options for textile applications. This will include a detailed review of 
available chipless RFID tags (RFID tags without chips and textile recycling compatible material composition), focusing 
on their eco-friendliness, recyclability, and operational frequency ranges. Various RFID tags, such as those identified in 
the methodology section (e.g., biopolymer-based, textile-based), will be included for their durability through consumer 
usage, data storage capacity, and transmission efficiency. Moreover, the implementation and deployment requirements, 
besides compatibility with current technologies like QR codes, will be developed, as well as the complementary 
requirements for integration with blockchain technology for dynamic/static public key embedding. CU also investigates 
innovative solutions like ink -based RFID tags, which offer the  advantage of being less obtrusive and potentially non - 
irritating for wearers, as survey feedback suggests. 
T4.1.2. TTRFID design for recycling analysis and assessment: PURFI and RECY focus on analysing the recycling 
Project: 101181988 — SORT4CIRC — HORIZON-CL6-2024-CIRCBIO-02 
12 
 
 
compatibilities of 3 technologies of TTRFID tags (provided by CU). This includes assessing the inclusion of TTRFID 
in recycling processes at several scales (from lab to pilot) and analysing the impact of TTRFID in recycling outcomes. 
T4.1.3. TTRFID economic and societal analysis and assessment: T6.4 will provide complementary information for the 
required readiness for SC configuration for supplying the TTRFID and related ROI analysis. Moreover, the results of 
the societal study for acceptance of TTRFID -equipped products will also be conducted in T6.4, contributing to the 
completion of the requ irements for the guidelines. They will integrate the technological assessment in T4.1.1, besides 
the outcomes of T4.1.2 and T4.1.3, as guidelines for designing and procuring TTRFID models. The guidelines will 
explain the required technological characterist ics, the economic and feasibility analysis, and the criteria for fulfilling 
consumer data privacy. The guidelines will explain the processes and methodologies for integrating TTRFID tags 
into various textiles, such as different textile processing scenarios, including washing and heat exposure. This ensures 
that the TTRFID tags can be seamlessly integrated into manufacturing processes without compromising the quality or 
functionality of the textile products. 
The results of the whole Task 4.1 will be reported in D4.1 and D4.2. 
T4.2: Design of an eco-friendly blockchain architecture for the DPP with traceability of data over TVC ecosystem [CU] 
(M1-M12) 
T4.2.1 Developing Guidelines for Assessment and Selection of Blockchain Platform: CU will develop guidelines for 
assessing and selecting blockchain platforms based on eco-friendliness, scalability, and support for smart contracts, 
as described in the methodology section. A comparative analysis of platforms like EBSI, Algorand, IOTA, and Ethereum 
will be conducted, considering factors such as energy consumption, transaction speed, cost and fulfilment with 
sustainability criteria for eco-friendly PoS consensus and support for smart contracts. 
Sub-task 4.2.2 Developing guidelines for fulfilling the DPP solution with Semantic Web framework: CU will focus on 
the DPP’s interoperability over blockchain with TVC IT solutions. The guideline will be extended to enhance data 
interoperability and machine readability over the Semantic Web framework. This involves guidelines for data model 
development using RDF & OWL. A shared vocabulary and data model will be created, ensuring all participants in the 
TVC ecosystem can uniformly interpret and utilise the data. Mappings to existing data formats (e.g. JSON, XML) will 
also be developed to facilitate smooth data integration. 
T4.2.3 Developing guidelines for DPP Semantic Data Format and API Standardisation: CU will extend the DPP 
development guidelines to support standardised data formats and enable seamless communication between different IT 
systems within the TVC ecosystem. RESTful APIs requirements will be designed and documented, and data translation 
layer implementation will be included to ensure compatibility of ERP and MES systems. This will involve defining 
standardised protocols and data formats for real -time updates and data retrieval based on standards like IEC 62264: 
(ISA-95) and IEC 62443: (ISA -99), and ISO 27001 certification for data security. The integration will connect the DPP 
and PSSR technologies with existing ERP and MES systems. This connection will streamline operations by making data 
from the DPP accessible to relevant stakeholders within the TVC ecosystem. 
T4.2.4 Developing guidelines for interoperability of DPP with IoT, TTRFID and Web3 Technologies: CU will extend 
the guideline to enable the communication of IoT and TTRFID technologies with the DPP blockchain system. The 
guidelines will detail the requirements for IoT-enabled sensors through TVC at key stages of the PSSR. The guidelines 
also include data container standards like XML headers to ensure data is structured in a standardised format. As detailed 
in the methodology section, the fulfilment of Web3 technologies will be included in guidelines to facilitate decentralised 
data exchange and interactions, ensuring secure and transparent operations. 
T4.2.5 Developing the guidelines for DPP Scalability and Flexibility for TVC: CU will develop the required guidelines 
for the scalability of DPP over the TVC. This is to enable comprehensive data coverage of the whole TVC ecosystem. The 
guideline will define the requirements of the DPP model over blockchain technologies for supporting both the increase of 
volumes of data when the input of textiles clothes increases and when more stakeholders are joining the TVC. Flexibility 
will be incorporated into the system design for easy updates and adaptations to accommodate new sorting technologies, 
regulatory changes, and evolving industry practices. Scalability testing criteria will ensure the system's capability to 
efficiently process growing volumes of textiles, maintaining performance and reliability as demand increases.  
The results of the whole Task 4.2 will be reported in D4.3. 
T4.3: Integration of the DPP data retrieval with the automatised PSFS & PSSR solutions [CU, CEA, IRIS, IOM, REFA] 
(M13-M24) 
T4.3.1 Developing APIs and Interface interoperability guidelines with PSFS & PSSR technologies: CU will extend the 
guideline for supporting the seamless connection and communication of technologies developed in PSFS & PSSR 
technologies with the DPP. This targets the DPP interoperability for data retrieval and communication with automated 
sorting machines. Efficient  data exchange will be facilitated by utilising APIs and standardised data formats such as 
JSON or XML. This will allow for real -time updates and retrieval of textile data, ensuring that sorting machines have 
the necessary information for efficient processing. 
Project: 101181988 — SORT4CIRC — HORIZON-CL6-2024-CIRCBIO-02 
13 
 
 
T4.3.2 Developing Blockchain and Smart Contract Integration guidelines for bidirectional PSSR customised queries: 
CU will develop guidelines for enabling the design of customised queries over DPP Smart contracts. This includes the 
possibility of using the DPP smart contract semantic model schema for developing customised queries over different 
TVC data by using the holonic structure explained in the methodology section ranging from Garment, Yarn, Fabric, 
Filament, types like Cotton, Synthetic and also the Energy and CO2 emission data. The PSFS & PSSR technologies can 
develop customised queries to retrieve customised inquiries. The outcomes will be released through DPP smart contract 
guidelines. REFA, IOM, CEA, and IRIS will develop sample queries for sorting for reuse/recycling technologies in 
SORT4CIRC deployment, embed them into their data processing technologies, and test and validate the guidelines for 
integrity in deployment at WP5. 
The results of the whole Task 4.3 will be reported in D4.4. 
T4.4: Establishment of a tokenised ecosystem over TVC [CU] (M20-M34) 
T4.4.1 Token Economy Scenario Design: CU designs the mechanisms for token issuance, distribution, and trading using 
the methodological approach explained. A comprehensive token economic scenario model will be developed to clarify 
how tokens are issued, distributed among participants, and traded within the TVC ecosystem. This model will also outline 
the incentive structures encouraging stakeholders through the TVC and consumers to adopt sustainable behaviours. The 
scenarios will be analysed from economic aspects, and the sustainability strategies, including energy and CO2 footprint 
tracking through the DPP model, will be examined to ensure the scalability and sustainability of the token circulation 
model. 
T4.4.2 Token Management System Development: CU develops the guidelines for implementing smart contracts for token 
management through DPP. Smart contracts will be coded to manage token issuance, transfer, and deduction securely. 
Integration with the DPP blockchain will ensure that all transactions are transparent and immutable. Security measures 
will be put in place to protect the integrity of the token management system, as well as the scalability of the token model 
over TVC. The result includes the details of a token exchange over the TVC SC, covering the holistic methodological 
approach for including tokens including Garment, Yarn, Fabric, Filament, Cotton, Synthetic and even Energy and CO2 
emission throughout the whole TVC. 
T4.4.3. LCA, TEF interoperability framework with DPP token economy model: CU establishes guidelines for 
compatibility of ISO 14040 and ISO 14044 LCA assessment over the token economy model. This will enable the LCA 
assessment models to use the DPP token as a backbone for assessment. CU develops guidelines for enabling the design 
of customised queries over the DPP token model and semantic model schema for developing customised queries over 
different TVC data by using the holonic structure explained in the methodology section ranging from Garment, Yarn, 
Fabric, Filament, types like Cotton, Synthetic and also the Energy and CO2 emission data. T6.2 and T6.3 outputs will give 
basis to CU for validating customised queries and activating smart contract actuators for regulatory context mechanisms. 
This will enable the TVC stakeholder to conduct LCA/TEF assessment and simulate and analyse their token initiation 
and distribution strategies from a TEF assessment perspective. CU validates the guidelines by designing LCA/TEF 
assessment scenarios over the DPP token strategy for the WP5 pilot demonstration. 
The results of the whole Task 4.4 will be reported in D4.5. 
T4.5: Development of DfD solutions over the DPP model [RESO, CU, RECY, PURFI] (M18-M36) 
T4.5.1 DfD Principles to eco-design new textile garments with Smart Stitch™ to ensure recyclability: RESO will gather 
requirements from RECY as well as use insights of previous projects and pilots to write preliminary eco-design guidelines 
for design-for-disassembly and design-for-recycling that will be used in T4.5.2. RECY will perform tests at lab and pilot 
scale with 3 families of feedstocks (PET/CO; PET/PA and PET/EA) provided by TXHO to identify the influence of 
Smart Stitch ™ technology on the recycling of identified textiles. For each famil y, 3 experiments will be done: 1) 
feedstock alone without any pre-treatment (reference), 2) feedstock with a thermal treatment (done by RESO) simulating 
the machine required for the disassembly of garments including the RESO’ technology) feedstock + Smart Stitch ™ 
threads (provided by RESO). Analyses will be done to assess the quality of the obtained monomer and the co-materials 
to evaluate the impact of the thermal process. The results from the tests done by RECY will be used to define preliminary 
guidelines taking into account recyclers’ needs. 
T4.5.2 DfD Principles Extractor Guideline over DPP: CU creates comprehensive guidelines for using DPP historical 
data over PSSR results. As explained in T4.3.2, the PSSR technologies will have a bi -directional interoperability with 
DPP. This enables the ca pture of PSSR results in DPP. CU will develop data analytical guidelines to extract insights 
about clothes' sorting and recycling compatibilities. The guidelines will result in the extraction of DfD principles. RESO 
will participate in the drafting of the guidelines by leveraging the preliminary guidelines defined in T4.5.1 for DfD rules, 
which focus on active disassembly methods such as thermally trigger stitching threads and adhesives as well as other 
non-permanent fastening methods and how they have improved recyclability. This task aims to provide comprehensive 
guidelines to enhance the recyclability of textile products and explain how DPP is crucial to enabling it. The principles 
can be used for researching best practices and consulting with industry experts to draft guidelines that prioritise the 
Project: 101181988 — SORT4CIRC — HORIZON-CL6-2024-CIRCBIO-02 
14 
 
 
 
 
 
Work package WP5 – Demonstrator 
 
Work Package Number WP5 Lead Beneficiary 15 - TXHO 
Work Package Name Demonstrator 
Start Month 19 End Month 36 
 
 
principles, like how the use of non-permanent fastening methods, such as screws, clips, or snaps, instead of adhesives 
or stitches can improve the recyclability. The guidelines will also cover layering strategies where different materials can 
be easily separated, ensuring that each layer can be processed individually during recycling. The guidelines will be 
validated with PURFI. 
T4.5.3 DfD Technology Development and Integration with DPP: RESO analyses tools and technologies for assisting 
textile disassembly, like heat -dissolvable bio -based and synthetic stitching threads. This also includes innovating 
disassembly tools that are efficient and cost-effective and help optimise the time for disassembly and recycling. Research 
into self-disassembling materials, which change properties under specific conditions, can facilitate easier disassembly 
will be conducted. Guidelines for detectin g such disassembling materials and related technologies will be embedded 
into the DPP model for effective PSSR processes by CU. This will be verified by successfully recognising DfD-enabled 
textile products through PSSR processes in WP5. 
The results of the whole Task 4.5 will be reported in D4.6 and D4.7. 
Objectives 
• Develop a comprehensive layout design for the pre-sorting pilot, integrating technologies. 
• Set up the pilot plan adjacent to the manual pre-sorting system and run a test using an offline bypass to ensure 
independent operation. 
• Replace the manual pre-sorting system with the pilot plant after successful testing and validation. 
• Establish a data connection to integrated operations' higher-level plant control system. 
• Equip the system with conveyor belts, stable frames for the mounting measuring devices, and RFID detectors. 
• Demonstrate the operational capabilities of the advanced sorting line and provide ongoing support for technology  
integration and measurement geometries. 
• Develop a token pilot model and demonstrate how textile product separation results in taken circularity. 
• Coordinate with recyclers to provide sufficient quantities of sorted feedstocks for testing. 
Description 
T5.1: Demonstration of an automatised PSFS pilot [SEM, TXHO, IRIS, CEA, REFA] (M19-M36) 
As gravity is used to transport the material from the pre-sorting line to the sorting line, the developed machine must be 
supported on a suitable metal frame so that the containers can be positioned under the outlet of the discharge chutes. SEM 
will design and build this metal frame, considering the spatial conditions of the factory halls at the selected plant. TXHO 
will support the machine manufacturer in the design of the automatic pre-sorting pilot. TXHO will provide plans for the 
halls, production facilities, and infrastructure for integrating the demonstrator into the existing sorting line. TXHO will 
draw up a specification sheet for the demonstrator and provide the machine builder with ongoing advice during the 
design phase. 
TXHO will first draw up a diagram of this sorting process so that the mechanical engineers can work out the basic 
methods for automated sorting. 
REFA will provide access to its automated sorting software system to detect various product attributes such as product 
type, wear condition, style, fabric construction, brand, colour, and size. Furthermore, the system will enable sorters to 
define feedstock requirements for each fraction via a management cockpit, allowing garments to be sorted according to 
a predefined ruleset. Additionally, REFA will provide the endpoint for the SKU retrieval system developed in WP2 for 
PSFS. The software system will also be capable of retrieving and processing DPP data.  
SEM, TXHO, and REFA will conduct a feasibility study to explore how the feeding process of the sorting line, 
specifically for unfolding garments, can be accelerated. While automation of the feeding process is a possibility, it must 
not compromise the high sorting quality standards required by second -hand buyers. SEM, IRIS, and CEA will analyse 
the sorting scheme, jointly determine a suitable arrangement for the measurement technology, and develop the layout 
for the pilot plant. A suitable position for the test run in bypass operation can be determined based on the hall plans and 
the dimensions of the production systems installed there. 
Project: 101181988 — SORT4CIRC — HORIZON-CL6-2024-CIRCBIO-02 
15 
 
 
After successful testing, SEM and TXHO will integrate the pilot plant into the production line with its maintenance 
department and establish a connection to the higher-level plant control system. 
The results of the Task 5.1 will be reported in D5.3. 
T5.2: Upgrade, integrate and demonstrate the advanced sorting technologies for recycling into an operational automatised 
sorting line [TXHO, SEM, IRIS, CEA, IOM] (M25-M36) 
The Multirange Spectroscopic Platform developed in WP3 by IRIS, which incorporates AI models from IRIS, IOM and 
CEA, will include the most relevant optical techniques for assessing the garments’ composition. The device consists of a 
real-time monitoring system prototype that will be coupled to the current TXHO mechanical sorting system. SEM must 
only establish a data connection to the Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) systems. TXHO will support 
SEM, IOM, IRIS and CEA in integrating optical measurement technologies into the existing sorting plant and defining 
the measurement geometries. Additionally, CEA and IRIS will conduct a regression test to validate the performance of 
the demonstrators developed in WP2-3 on the sorting line. 
The results of the Task 5.2 will be reported in D5.4. 
T5.3: Validation of SORT4CIRC DPP blockchain for storage/retrieval of TVC [CU, SEM, TXHO, IOM, CEA, RESO] 
(M25-M34) 
T5.3.1. TTRFID technology deployment in pilot demonstrator: CU will adopt TTRFID tags using the results of Del N°: 
4.1, 4.2 and will deploy demonstration textile samples with attached TTRFIDs. The consolidation of TTRFID 
infrastructure with PSSR technologies will be assessed and validated by TXHO and deployed in demonstrator. 
T5.3.2. DPP blockchain technology deployment and integration in pilot demonstrator: CU will adopt the guidelines for 
DPP blockchain architecture using the results of Del N°: 4.3, 4.4 and will deploy an eco -friendly PoS consensus and 
smart contract supporting structure. The blockchain architecture for DPP will be empowered by leveraging Semantic 
Web technologies to enhance data interoperability and machine readability across other technologies in the demonstrator. 
CU will define the data model using RDF and OWL and fulfil the standardised APIs and data formats to enable seamless 
communication between different technology systems within the TVC ecosystem. The DPP blockchain will be integrated 
with TTRFID, and the validation of seamless communication result will be a blockchain DPP token model integrated 
with TTRFID in the demonstration pilot. The DPP then will be validated for interoperability with the demonstrator pilot 
PSFS & PSSR technologie s. SEM will test their sample queries for pre -sorting technologies in the SORT4CIRC 
demonstrator and validate the integrity of effective pre -sorting. REFA, IOM, CEA and IRIS will test their queries for 
sorting for recycling technologies in SORT4CIRC deploy ment embed and validate the effective distinguishing of the 
textile parts. RESO will test the DPP to recognise heat-dissolvable bio-based and synthetic stitching threads. SEM will 
integrate the results through the demonstrator pilot in terms of embedment of PSFS & PSSR queries with the DPP model 
and successful distinguishing of TTRFID-equipped textile products. 
T5.3.3. DPP tokenisation realisation and validation in pilot demonstrator: CU will develop the token pilot model. The 
PSFS & PSSR technology bidirectional communication results will be used to shape the demonstration of how the 
distinguishing and separation of textile products will result in token circularity. The scenarios released in Del N°: 4.5 will 
simulated, and the token management system will be demonstrated. CU will present an autonomous and interoperable 
LCA assessment framework over the DPP tolerised demonstrator. 
The results of the whole Task 5.3 will be reported in D5.1 and D5.2. 
T5.4: Validation of SORT4CIRC sorted feedstock for high-value recycling at recyclers facilities [RECY, TXHO, PURFI] 
(M30-M36) 
TXHO conducts sorting tests and makes the sorted materials available to all participating recycling companies for 
analysis and validation. The goal is to integrate the sorted feedstock into existing high -value recycling processes at the 
recyclers' facilities. TXHO will monitor and document the performance of the feedstock in various recycling operations, 
such as thermo-mechanical, chemical recycling, and fabric regeneration, and compare the performance of SORT4CIRC 
sorted feedstock with standard feedstock to identify differences in efficiency, yield, and product quality. The results from 
the performance validation will be analysed to pinpoint areas for improvement in the sorting process. Detailed feedback 
will be provided to the SORT4CIRC development team on the performance of the sorted feedstock. Additionally, TXHO 
will collaborate with the machinery builder, IOM, CEA, and IRIS to implement necessary adjustments and optimise the 
sorting parameters for better results. 
Assuming the capacity of the current textile sorting plant is not expanded during the project period and the material 
composition of the garments for recycling remains the same, TXHO could deliver around 10% of the total sorted material 
to the recyclers for validation. 
PURFI will run tests on 3 families of feedstock provided by TXHO (CO/PES, Cotton, Polyester). The first test will 
determine if the feedstock meets the requirements for closed loop mechanical recycling. Feedback will be provided to 
TXHO. After approval of test 1 PURFI can go into further testing to see if the desired outcome can be reached.  
Project: 101181988 — SORT4CIRC — HORIZON-CL6-2024-CIRCBIO-02 
16 
 
 
 
 
 
Work package WP6 – Technical and economic feasibility, environmental and social 
assessment, design and efficiency improvement 
 
Work Package Number WP6 Lead Beneficiary 11 - PSB 
Work Package Name Technical and economic feasibility, environmental and social assessment, design and 
efficiency improvement 
Start Month 1 End Month 36 
 
Description 
Description of work 
T6.1: SORT4CIRC data collection [ARIS, PSB, ALL] (M3-M15) 
T6.1.1: Process flow -sheeting, inventory data collection and preliminary economic potential and GHG emissions 
calculations: This task aims to conceptually determine and illustrate the SORT4CIRC process and its value chain. ARIS 
will develop a flowsheet depicting the sequence of process operations and equipment units, material streams (e.g., raw 
materials, products, by-products, wastes) and operating conditions (e.g., temperature, pressure, flow rate). The mass and 
energy balances (LCI) of both the existing (state -of-the-art) and the SORT4CIRC proposed process will be calculated 
based on data attained from WPs 2 -5 and will provide the basis for estimating all the inventory data required for the 
techno-economic and environmental impact assessments (Tasks 6.2 and 6.3). A preliminary estimation of the economic 
potential and the environmental burden will also be performed, and the results will be used in T4.1.3 and T4.4.3, linked 
to D.4.2 and D.4.5, respectively, to facilitate a technology screening. 
T6.1.2: Mapping the current textile forward and reverse SC network, physical, information, and financial flows across 
the EU, including demand and supply side specifications for each stakeholder and connection between them: PSB will 
(1) map the existing post -consumer value chain of the textile products by identifying the involved entities and 
stakeholders (consumers, collectors, recyclers, industrial users, second-hand markets, charity shops) as well as existing 
physical, information and financial flows and exploring potential supply points, and demand markets that can be possibly 
integrated into the value chain after introducing/implementing the new sorting system; and will (2) identify the existing 
BMs and practices in the textile reuse and recovery industry and their current effectiveness. All partners will provide 
necessary and detailed information concerning material, information, and financial flow, as well as existing supply and 
collection network. 
The results of the whole Task 6.1 will be reported in D6.1. 
T6.2: Environmental impact assessment [ARIS, ALL] (M15-M34) 
To estimate the environmental performance of SORT4CIRC process, ARIS will initially perform an ex -ante, 
attributional, gate-to-gate LCA study, according to ISO 14040/44 and 14025, to assess the impact of the deployment of 
the new technologies on the existing sorting process. For this analysis, the system boundaries will include only the sorting 
processes. Subsequently, ARIS will perform an ex -ante, consequential cradle -to-cradle LCA study, according to ISO 
14040/44 and 14025, to assess the consequential benefits imposed by the new technologies along the whole value chain of 
RECY will run text on 4 families of feedstocks provided by TXHO (PET/CO; PET/PA; PET/EA; multilayers with 
enough PET). For each family of feedstock, 2 test runs will be done by RECY at different scales (from lab to pilot or 
industrial demonstrator if relevant)1st: feedback to TXHO. 2nd test: 2nd runs to see if what does not work at the 1st has 
been corrected.) Analyses will be done on monomers and co-materials to validate that the sorted feedstocks fit with our 
recycling process. 
The results of the Task 5.4 will be reported in D5.5. 
Objectives 
• Determine the LCI of the whole value chain. 
• Assess the economic and environmental impact of the textile sorting process automation. 
• Identify and mitigate potential risks associated with the automation project, such as technical challenges, market 
demand fluctuations, and regulatory compliance. 
• Evaluate the viability of the CE BM, industrial symbiosis among recyclers, along with social acceptance and consumer 
welfare. 
• Optimise the design and operation of the automated sorting system. 
Project: 101181988 — SORT4CIRC — HORIZON-CL6-2024-CIRCBIO-02 
17 
 
 
the textile recycling process. For this analysis, the system boundaries will include all the foreground processes developed 
in WP2-4 of the SORT4CIRC and downstream (distribution) processes, including waste treatment and all the auxiliary 
(background) processes needed for the material/energy supply. LCI derived from Task 6.1, will be the basis for the LCA. 
The environmental impact, emphasising GHG emissions (kg CO2 -eq) and water use (m3 depriv.), will be evaluated 
based on the Environmental Footprint v3.1 method of the EU Commission. Other relevant environmental impacts that 
are directly related to (i) minimisation of wastewater stream production (freshwater ecotoxicity and eutrophication), (ii) 
optimisation of resource use efficiency (resource use, fossils, minerals and metals); and (iii) volatile organic compounds 
avoidance (i.e. ozone depletion, photo chemical ozone formation, particulate matter and human toxicity), will also be 
estimated to assess the global environmental burden of the SORT4CIRC. To determine the reliability of the obtained 
impact results, uncertainty analysis ‒ Monte Carlo random sampling on inventory data probability distributions coupled 
with multiple iterations for LCA calculations ‒ will be applied. All partners will validate the relevant assumptions 
concerning the system boundaries. The results will be summarised in D6.2, highlighting the environmental performance 
of SORT4CIRC and will be used for the benchmarking in T6.6. 
The results of the Task 6.2 will be reported in D6.2. 
T6.3: Cost-benefit analysis of SORT4CIRC [ARIS, ALL] (M15-M34) 
Within this task the TEA of SORT4CIRC will be performed by ARIS. All partners will provide additional data and 
validate relevant assumptions concerning the pieces of equipment and the system boundary limits. ARIS will perform a 
cost-benefit analysis based on the LCI obtained in T6.1. Particularly, the operating cost of the sorting process (i.e., 
labour, capital depreciation, raw materials and utilities, etc.) will initially be estimated. Further, based on the anticipated 
sales revenue, the economic benefit of SORT4CIRC will be estimated in terms of profit margin, ROI, and payout time. 
The cost-benefit analysis will determine the SORT4CIRC financial viability and steer it towards a more cost -effective 
approach. The results will be summarised in D6.3 and benchmarked against the state -of-the-art process in T6.6. 
The results of the Task 6.3 will be reported in D6.3. 
T6.4: BM evaluation, industrial symbiosis, social acceptance and consumer welfare [PSB, ALL] (M1-M36) 
This task evaluates the BMs for SORT4CIRC, focusing on industrial symbiosis, social acceptance, and consumer welfare. 
It aims to develop viable CE BMs that foster collaboration among producers, collectors, recyclers and other stakeholders. 
This task addresses the broader business and social implications of the project, as follows: CE Model: PSB evaluates 
BMs for the CE, with a focus on revenue generation strategies, SC management, and market demand for re-wearable and 
recycled textiles. Additionally, PSB assesses the impact of introducing DPP technologies in textiles, as well as the effects 
of EPR regulations on these areas. Collaboration for Efficiency: PSB analyses opportunities for industrial symbiosis, 
where different companies in the recycling sector can collaborate to enhance resource efficiency and potentially reduce 
costs. Public Perception: PSB assesses the social acceptance of using DPP technologies in clothes (e.g., TTRFID - 
equipped clothes) required as an inp ut for WP4, and consumer attitudes towards re -wearable and recycled textiles. 
Consumer Well-being: PSB evaluates the impact of new processes developed by SORT4CIRC on consumer welfare. 
This includes the quality, availability, and affordability of re -wearable and recycled textile products. While the initial 
two points are addressed through analytical techniques, such as game -theoretical approaches, the remaining two are 
investigated mainly using empirical research methods. All partners provide additional dat a required for the modelling 
and survey design process, review and verify the validity of the models and surveys designed and assess the credibility 
of the results. 
The results of the Task 6.4 will be reported in D6.4. 
T6.5: Design and operation optimisation of the automated sorting system [PSB, ARIS, TXHO] (M12-M36) 
This task aims to optimise the design of the sorting system and to ensure a smooth workflow and operations throughout 
the system. This task involves the development of mathematical models and heuristic approaches to tackle the main 
design problems, including equipment selection, staff requirements, facility layout planning, and line balancing. This task 
also includes the development and validation of a fine -grained simulation model using FlexSim© simulation software 
that allows us to imitate the behaviour of the real system considering detailed system characteristics and operations as 
well as dynamic and stochastic elements, which helps us measure the system’s KPIs (e.g., throughput, time in the system, 
etc.), and identify potential bottlenecks, all lead to decide whether the designed system is efficient. We test the system’s 
performance under various conditions (e.g., supply fluctuation, etc.), and also, based on the insights obtained from the 
simulation model, we test selected scenarios that could improve the system’s efficiency using the developed simulation 
model. We also perform comparative studies using simulation modelling to evaluate the existing sorting system against 
the automated, technology-integrated system SORT4CIRC aims to create. ARIS provides the process flow data collected 
in T6.1.1. TXHO provides initial design and operations instructions as well as all necessary data that allows us to model 
the manual and automated sorting processes. TXHO also verifies the validity of models and results and provides input 
to create and test new scenarios for design and operations improvement. 
Project: 101181988 — SORT4CIRC — HORIZON-CL6-2024-CIRCBIO-02 
18 
 
 
 
 
 
Work package WP7 – Communication, Dissemination, and Exploitation 
 
Work Package Number WP7 Lead Beneficiary 7 - CEF 
Work Package Name Communication, Dissemination, and Exploitation 
Start Month 1 End Month 36 
 
Description 
T7.1: Communication, Dissemination and Exploitation activities [CEF, CGS, TRA, ALL] (M1-M36) 
Together with all SORT4CIRC partners, CEF and TRA will develop a Communication, Dissemination and Exploitation 
(CDE) Plan to ensure the successful exploitation of the SORT4CIRC results and to identify opportunities for synergy 
and guide SORT4CIRC communication and dissemination activities relevant to the project, monitoring procedures and 
the sustainability of the project beyond its lifecycle. The Key Exploitable Results, as defined in Table 4, will be in 
responsibility of the individual partners or WPs and the strategy for utilization and exploitation of results and all resulting 
exploitation activities will be included in the CDE. Considering the three -year project duration, necessary adjustments 
will be made to the plan on a regular basis, taking into account the evaluation of outreach and communication analytics, 
as well as successes, lessons learnt and future opportunities that may have emerged since SORT4CIRC’s inception as 
reported by all project partners. A monthly communications meeting between the partners will be held to keep each other 
up to date with communications activities and communications opportunities. 
Along with the Plan, a Brand Book will be established by CEF at the project outset to articulate SORT4CIRC’s visual 
identity, including logos, colour codes, images, templates (i.e. for web banners, social media visuals, flyers, posters, etc), 
key messages, and promotional text. CEF will prepare promotional and communication materials (e.g. SORT4CIRC 
brochures, visual materials for social media, short promotional videos, tailored presentations, flyers, etc.) to support the 
promotional and communication actions throughout the project. The format of the materials will be adapted to the 
diverse promotional and communication channels to be used. CGS will provide communications (i.e. social med ia 
content creation and management) and design support (i.e. visualisations, infographics, website design) to this task.  
To ensure effective dissemination, the project will rely on continuous dissemination by maintaining an online presence 
and participating in existing events to regularly update external stakeholders on project progress, as well as punctual 
communications campaigns designed to give a boost to SORT4CIRC’s dissemination efforts at crucial moments in the 
project. Project communication and dissemination activities will be implemented via different platforms and channels 
(i.e. SORT4CIRC website, social networks, media platforms, etc). Social media posts will be shared on SORT4CIRC and 
partners’ social media accounts, while the news item will be pitched to relevant media and published on SORT4CIRC 
website. An opinion article will also be pitched to relevant media and/or published on SORT4CIRC website. Relevant 
media outlets focus on sustainability, SC, and recycling. For effective communication and advocacy, SORT4CIRC will 
produce a newsletter, and social media posts every year. 
A dedicated website for SORT4CIRC will be set up in M3 by CEF, which is in line with the DMP. Project partners will 
develop regular content to be uploaded to the website through short blogs, news, key updates on the project, and other 
content types. The website will integrate a newsletter signup feature to give the public exclusive access to SORT4CIRC 
project updates. Following the project, the SORT4CIRC website will be assessed if potential improvements to its features 
are needed following the development of SORT4CIRC’s activities. 
The results of the Task 6.5 will be reported in D6.5. 
T6.6: Technologies benchmarking [ARIS, WP Leaders] (M18-M36) 
Herein, ARIS will benchmark the developing textile sorting process against its state-of-the-art counterparts with all WP 
leaders in support. It will indicate (i) the maximum sorting cost this new sorting process can reach and still be competitive 
and (ii) the positioning of the SORT4CIRC process against the competitors in terms of cost, environmental impact and 
technical performance. 
The results of the Task 6.6 will be reported in D6.6 and D6.7. 
Objectives 
• Raise awareness of the SORT4CIRC project 
• Implement training sessions/webinars tailored to each WP theme, key challenges and needs 
• Disseminate the results and lessons learnt to policymakers, project stakeholders and other interested parties to shape 
future policies and research agendas on circular textiles. 
Project: 101181988 — SORT4CIRC — HORIZON-CL6-2024-CIRCBIO-02 
19 
 
 
Together with all SORT4CIRC partners, CEF and TRA will contribute to clustering activities (joint kick off, joint events 
or final events) with other EU projects selected under the same topic. Such activities will aim at identifying synergies, 
exchanging good practices and providing evidence for EU policy developments. The common activities might include 
joint dissemination and/or exploitation activities, as well as coordinated deliverables related to policy recommendations. 
The results of the Task 7.1 will be reported in D7.1, D7.2, D7.3, D7.4, D7.6, D7.7, D7.8 and D7.11. 
T7.2: Development of knowledge and policy support [CEF, CGS,ALL] (M1 -M36) 
To ensure that the outcome and impact of SORT4CIRC can also be translated beyond the project timeline, CEF will 
consolidate all content materials and lessons learnt with the inputs of all project partners throughout the project into a 
comprehensive, user-friendly toolbox. CGS will provide communications and design support to this tool. This toolbox 
will ensure that the best practices and approaches implemented in this project are transferable and can be applied 
by European businesses, start -ups, service providers, as well as academia and public institutions in the future when 
supporting the establishment and strengthening of a just and transparent CE for textiles in Europe. For future CE projects, 
the toolbox will be designed to help them avoid duplication of efforts, and build on existing best practices, speed up the 
knowledge translation process and contribute to the existing body of work on this subject matter as well as inform real-life 
circular practices. A launch event will be held to further disseminate the toolbox beyond the SORT4CIRC community. 
A set of policy briefing documents will be dedicated to European, national and regional policymakers with 
recommendations for support measures promoting the deployment of circular textile solutions. The recommendations 
will aim to improve existing policy frameworks that impact the CE and will be forward-looking to shape future research 
agendas and policy measures impacting circular solution implementation. The document will be anchored in results and 
findings from SORT4CIRC’s WP2-6 activities. 
The results of the Task 7.2 will be reported in in D7.5 and D7.9. 
T7.3: Complementary knowledge transfer [CEF, CGS, TRA, ALL] (M1-M36) 
Furthermore, a comprehensive knowledge sharing and training of five 90 -minute webinars/training sessions will be 
developed by CEF in collaboration with CGS communication and design experts. The emphasis of each session will be 
based on needs expressed by project actors and the experience of project actors and include findings and learnings from 
WP2-WP6. While the content of the webinars will be tailored to the challenges and learnings/insights/interests expressed 
by SORT4CIRC project actors, other interested parties and other partners within the CCRI network are welcome to join 
and participate. The content materials used in the webinars will be shared with the project actors, and the webinar will 
be recorded, edited and shared as an additional resource uploaded to the SORT4CIRC website for future use. All content 
materials and webinars will be delivered in English. All project partners will support the capacity -building program. 
CEF will coordinate with the CCRI to align communication efforts. To ensure SORT4CIRC’s visibility, events where 
the project can be presented to encourage cross-promotion and cross-pollination with other actors within the CE sector 
will be identified in the Plan. Examples include the ‘Textiles Ecosystem Stakeholders’ event organised by the European 
Commission’s DG GROW, the ‘Global Fashion Summit’ organised by the Global Fashion Agenda, or the European CE 
Stakeholder Platform’s Textile Leadership Group events where CEF is a member and strategic partner. CEF is also an 
Associated Partner to CCRI’s Coordination and Support Office, contributing to multiple Thematic Working Groups such 
as the Circular Resource Management group (which covers textiles), as well as a co -host of the World CE Forum. We 
expect to attend/participate in two external events per year (six events total) to i ncrease SORT4CIRC’s visibility and 
foster networking opportunities within the project partners’ network and externally.  
Create a standard of pre -sorting categories used by more operators with more than 20% market share. Using TRA's 
leverage with the CEO being the General Delegate of the Bureau of International Recycling's textiles division and 
a board member of the textiles division at the European Recycling Industries Confederation, TRA will work with 
WP partners first to deliver the framework for this categorisation, then using their extensive European network 
liaise with major European sorters to seek the necessary consensus on delivering this objective. Various cocreation/ 
participatory approaches will be adopted, including online and in-person workshops, one-to-one meetings, surveys and 
other appropriate means. TRA will also assist in providing WP partners with necessary garments to establish the data 
repository and facilitate improving garment recognition and worn-out garments where necessary. 
The results of the Task 7.3 will be reported in D7.10. 
Project: 101181988 — SORT4CIRC — HORIZON-CL6-2024-CIRCBIO-02 
20 
 
 
STAFF EFFORT 
 
 
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
Project: 101181988 — SORT4CIRC — HORIZON-CL6-2024-CIRCBIO-02 
21 
 
 
LIST OF DELIVERABLES 
 
Deliverables 
Grant Preparation (Deliverables screen) — Enter the info. 
The labels used mean: 
Public — fully open (  automatically posted online) 
Sensitive — limited under the conditions of the Grant Agreement 
EU classified —RESTREINT-UE/EU-RESTRICTED, CONFIDENTIEL-UE/EU-CONFIDENTIAL, SECRET-UE/EU-SECRET under Decision 2015/444 
Deliverable 
No 
Deliverable Name Work 
Package 
No 
Lead Beneficiary Type Dissemination Level Due Date 
(month) 
D1.1 Project Management Plan WP1 1 - CU R — Document, report SEN - Sensitive 3 
D1.2 Data Management Plan WP1 1 - CU DMP — Data 
Management Plan 
PU - Public 6 
D1.3 Project meeting minutes and decision 
records M1-M18 
WP1 1 - CU R — Document, report SEN - Sensitive 18 
D1.4 Data Management Plan M18 WP1 1 - CU DMP — Data 
Management Plan 
PU - Public 18 
D1.5 Project meeting minutes and decision 
records M18-M24 
WP1 1 - CU R — Document, report SEN - Sensitive 24 
D1.6 Project meeting minutes and decision 
records M24-M36 
WP1 1 - CU R — Document, report SEN - Sensitive 36 
D1.7 Data Management Plan M36 WP1 1 - CU DMP — Data 
Management Plan 
PU - Public 36 
D2.1 Development of a complete machine for 
PSFS 
WP2 9 - SEM DEM — Demonstrator, 
pilot, prototype 
SEN - Sensitive 12 
D2.2 Sorting system for PSFS WP2 9 - SEM DEM — Demonstrator, 
pilot, prototype 
SEN - Sensitive 20 

Project: 101181988 — SORT4CIRC — HORIZON-CL6-2024-CIRCBIO-02 
22 
 
 
 
Deliverables 
Grant Preparation (Deliverables screen) — Enter the info. 
The labels used mean: 
Public — fully open (  automatically posted online) 
Sensitive — limited under the conditions of the Grant Agreement 
EU classified —RESTREINT-UE/EU-RESTRICTED, CONFIDENTIEL-UE/EU-CONFIDENTIAL, SECRET-UE/EU-SECRET under Decision 2015/444 
Deliverable 
No 
Deliverable Name Work 
Package 
No 
Lead Beneficiary Type Dissemination Level Due Date 
(month) 
D2.3 Automated detection for a PSFS garment 
sorting system 
WP2 14 - REFA DEM — Demonstrator, 
pilot, prototype 
SEN - Sensitive 24 
D2.4 Usage Guidelines WP2 14 - REFA R — Document, report PU - Public 24 
D2.5 Summaries of Learning and Deployment 
Insights 
WP2 14 - REFA R — Document, report PU - Public 24 
D3.1 Report on characterisation of textile samples WP3 15 - TXHO R — Document, report PU - Public 6 
D3.2 Report on the selection of best techniques for 
the recognition of complex garments 
WP3 8 - CEA R — Document, report SEN - Sensitive 18 
D3.3 Multirange Spectroscopic smart sensing 
system 
WP3 13 - IRIS DEM — Demonstrator, 
pilot, prototype 
SEN - Sensitive 24 
D3.4 Eco-design guidelines and report on the 
process to recognise DfD garments 
WP3 5 - RESOR R — Document, report PU - Public 24 
D3.5 Tests report WP3 4 - RECY R — Document, report SEN - Sensitive 24 
D4.1 TTRFID assessment WP4 1 - CU R — Document, report SEN - Sensitive 6 
D4.2 TTRFID design and selection guideline WP4 1 - CU R — Document, report SEN - Sensitive 12 
D4.3 DPP development guidelines WP4 1 - CU R — Document, report PU - Public 12 
D4.4 DPP smart contract guidelines for PSFS & 
PSSR compatibility 
WP4 1 - CU R — Document, report PU - Public 24 

Project: 101181988 — SORT4CIRC — HORIZON-CL6-2024-CIRCBIO-02 
23 
 
 
 
Deliverables 
Grant Preparation (Deliverables screen) — Enter the info. 
The labels used mean: 
Public — fully open (  automatically posted online) 
Sensitive — limited under the conditions of the Grant Agreement 
EU classified —RESTREINT-UE/EU-RESTRICTED, CONFIDENTIEL-UE/EU-CONFIDENTIAL, SECRET-UE/EU-SECRET under Decision 2015/444 
Deliverable 
No 
Deliverable Name Work 
Package 
No 
Lead Beneficiary Type Dissemination Level Due Date 
(month) 
D4.5 Tokenised Ecosystem framework analysis 
and development guideline 
WP4 1 - CU R — Document, report SEN - Sensitive 30 
D4.6 DfD solution development over DPP 
framework 
WP4 5 - RESOR DEM — Demonstrator, 
pilot, prototype 
SEN - Sensitive 36 
D4.7 Guidelines for recyclability and reusability WP4 5 - RESOR R — Document, report PU - Public 36 
D5.1 TTRFID technology deployment WP5 1 - CU DEM — Demonstrator, 
pilot, prototype 
SEN - Sensitive 28 
D5.2 DPP Blockchain demonstration deployment 
with tokenised LCA assessment dashboard 
WP5 15 - TXHO DEM — Demonstrator, 
pilot, prototype 
SEN - Sensitive 34 
D5.3 Automatised PSFS pilot WP5 9 - SEM DEM — Demonstrator, 
pilot, prototype 
SEN - Sensitive 36 
D5.4 Upgrade Automatised Sorting Line WP5 15 - TXHO DEM — Demonstrator, 
pilot, prototype 
SEN - Sensitive 36 
D5.5 Validation of Sorted Feedstock WP5 4 - RECY DEM — Demonstrator, 
pilot, prototype 
SEN - Sensitive 36 
D5.6 Successful recycling of sorted feedstock WP5 4 - RECY R — Document, report PU - Public 36 
D6.1 Data collection for SORT4CIRC WP6 3 - ARIS R — Document, report SEN - Sensitive 15 
D6.2 Report on environmental impact assessment WP6 3 - ARIS R — Document, report SEN - Sensitive 34 
D6.3 Report on cost-benefit analysis WP6 3 - ARIS R — Document, report SEN - Sensitive 34 

Project: 101181988 — SORT4CIRC — HORIZON-CL6-2024-CIRCBIO-02 
24 
 
 
 
Deliverables 
Grant Preparation (Deliverables screen) — Enter the info. 
The labels used mean: 
Public — fully open (  automatically posted online) 
Sensitive — limited under the conditions of the Grant Agreement 
EU classified —RESTREINT-UE/EU-RESTRICTED, CONFIDENTIEL-UE/EU-CONFIDENTIAL, SECRET-UE/EU-SECRET under Decision 2015/444 
Deliverable 
No 
Deliverable Name Work 
Package 
No 
Lead Beneficiary Type Dissemination Level Due Date 
(month) 
D6.4 Report on the BM settings WP6 11 - PSB R — Document, report SEN - Sensitive 36 
D6.5 Report on the efficient design and operation 
of the automated sorting system 
WP6 11 - PSB R — Document, report SEN - Sensitive 36 
D6.6 Holistic technology benchmarking among 
different textile sorting processes 
WP6 3 - ARIS R — Document, report PU - Public 36 
D6.7 Public report on environmental impact 
assessment 
WP6 3 - ARIS R — Document, report PU - Public 34 
D7.1 Communication, Dissemination, and 
Exploitation Plan M3 
WP7 7 - CEF R — Document, report PU - Public 3 
D7.2 SORT4CIRC Brand Book WP7 7 - CEF R — Document, report SEN - Sensitive 3 
D7.3 SORT4CIRC website WP7 7 - CEF DEC —Websites, patent 
filings, videos, etc 
PU - Public 4 
D7.4 Communication, Dissemination, and 
Exploitation Plan M12 
WP7 7 - CEF R — Document, report PU - Public 12 
D7.5 SORT4CIRC policy briefing document M18 WP7 7 - CEF R — Document, report PU - Public 18 
D7.6 Communication, Dissemination, and 
Exploitation Plan M36 
WP7 7 - CEF R — Document, report PU - Public 36 
D7.7 SORT4CIRC circular textiles toolbox WP7 7 - CEF R — Document, report PU - Public 36 
D7.8 SORT4CIRC policy briefing document M36 WP7 7 - CEF R — Document, report PU - Public 36 

Project: 101181988 — SORT4CIRC — HORIZON-CL6-2024-CIRCBIO-02 
25 
 
 
 
Deliverables 
Grant Preparation (Deliverables screen) — Enter the info. 
The labels used mean: 
Public — fully open (  automatically posted online) 
Sensitive — limited under the conditions of the Grant Agreement 
EU classified —RESTREINT-UE/EU-RESTRICTED, CONFIDENTIEL-UE/EU-CONFIDENTIAL, SECRET-UE/EU-SECRET under Decision 2015/444 
Deliverable 
No 
Deliverable Name Work 
Package 
No 
Lead Beneficiary Type Dissemination Level Due Date 
(month) 
D7.9 Report on capacity building webinars WP7 7 - CEF R — Document, report SEN - Sensitive 36 
D7.10 Summary of clustering activties WP7 7 - CEF R — Document, report PU - Public 36 

Project: 101181988 — SORT4CIRC — HORIZON-CL6-2024-CIRCBIO-02 
26 
 
 
Deliverable D1.1 – Project Management Plan 
 
Deliverable Number D1.1 Lead Beneficiary 1 - CU 
Deliverable Name Project Management Plan 
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
Due Date (month) 3 Work Package No WP1 
 
 
Deliverable D1.2 – Data Management Plan 
 
Deliverable Number D1.2 Lead Beneficiary 1 - CU 
Deliverable Name Data Management Plan 
Type DMP — Data Management 
Plan 
Dissemination Level PU - Public 
Due Date (month) 6 Work Package No WP1 
 
 
Deliverable D1.3 – Project meeting minutes and decision records M1-M18 
 
Deliverable Number D1.3 Lead Beneficiary 1 - CU 
Deliverable Name Project meeting minutes and decision records M1-M18 
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
Due Date (month) 18 Work Package No WP1 
 
 
Deliverable D1.4 – Data Management Plan M18 
 
Deliverable Number D1.4 Lead Beneficiary 1 - CU 
Deliverable Name Data Management Plan M18 
Type DMP — Data Management 
Plan 
Dissemination Level PU - Public 
Due Date (month) 18 Work Package No WP1 
Description 
Setting up a quality management policy covering all aspects related to practical management (document exchanges & 
internal workflows) of the project. (related to task 1.4). 
Description 
Establishment of procedures describing how project data will be handled and what data will  be collected, processed or 
generated, methodologies and standards followed regarding sharing, duration, and preservation, ensuring full compliance 
with Open science policy (related to task 1.4). 
Description 
Preparation, distribution and approval of minutes of meetings incl. agenda, decision records, action plan (related to task 
1.1-3). 
Project: 101181988 — SORT4CIRC — HORIZON-CL6-2024-CIRCBIO-02 
27 
 
 
 
 
 
Deliverable D1.5 – Project meeting minutes and decision records M18-M24 
 
Deliverable Number D1.5 Lead Beneficiary 1 - CU 
Deliverable Name Project meeting minutes and decision records M18-M24 
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
Due Date (month) 24 Work Package No WP1 
 
 
Deliverable D1.6 – Project meeting minutes and decision records M24-M36 
 
Deliverable Number D1.6 Lead Beneficiary 1 - CU 
Deliverable Name Project meeting minutes and decision records M24-M36 
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
Due Date (month) 36 Work Package No WP1 
 
 
Deliverable D1.7 – Data Management Plan M36 
 
Deliverable Number D1.7 Lead Beneficiary 1 - CU 
Deliverable Name Data Management Plan M36 
Type DMP — Data Management 
Plan 
Dissemination Level PU - Public 
Due Date (month) 36 Work Package No WP1 
 
 
Deliverable D2.1 – Development of a complete machine for PSFS 
 
Deliverable Number D2.1 Lead Beneficiary 9 - SEM 
Description 
Establishment of procedures describing how project data will be handled and what data will  be collected, processed or 
generated, methodologies and standards followed regarding sharing, duration, and preservation, ensuring full compliance 
with Open science policy (related to task 1.4). 
Description 
Preparation, distribution and approval of minutes of meetings incl. agenda, decision records, action plan (related to task 
1.1-3). 
Description 
Preparation, distribution and approval of minutes of meetings incl. agenda, decision records, action plan (related to task 
1.1-3). 
Description 
Establishment of procedures describing how project data will be handled and what data will  be collected, processed or 
generated, methodologies and standards followed regarding sharing, duration, and preservation, ensuring full compliance 
with Open science policy (related to task 1.4). 
Project: 101181988 — SORT4CIRC — HORIZON-CL6-2024-CIRCBIO-02 
28 
 
 
 
Deliverable Name Development of a complete machine for PSFS 
Type DEM — Demonstrator, 
pilot, prototype 
Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
Due Date (month) 12 Work Package No WP2 
 
 
Deliverable D2.2 – Sorting system for PSFS 
 
Deliverable Number D2.2 Lead Beneficiary 9 - SEM 
Deliverable Name Sorting system for PSFS 
Type DEM — Demonstrator, 
pilot, prototype 
Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
Due Date (month) 20 Work Package No WP2 
 
 
Deliverable D2.3 – Automated detection for a PSFS garment sorting system 
 
Deliverable Number D2.3 Lead Beneficiary 14 - REFA 
Deliverable Name Automated detection for a PSFS garment sorting system 
Type DEM — Demonstrator, 
pilot, prototype 
Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
Due Date (month) 24 Work Package No WP2 
 
 
Deliverable D2.4 – Usage Guidelines 
 
Deliverable Number D2.4 Lead Beneficiary 14 - REFA 
Deliverable Name Usage Guidelines 
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level PU - Public 
Due Date (month) 24 Work Package No WP2 
 
Description 
Development of an all -in-one solution for the new type of pre -sorting and advanced sorting technologies, integrating 
multirange spectroscopic smart sensing, data fusion capabilities, and automated material for optimised textile sorting 
process (related to task 2.3). 
Description 
Development of an automatic sorting system for pre- and fine sorting that uses camera technology and AI methods 
to determine the type and quality of garments and sort them into defined fractions using a suitable discharge module 
(related to task 2.2). 
Description 
Development of a sorting software system that automatically detects product attributes such as product type, wear 
condition, fabric construction, brand, colour and sizes, with a SKU retrieval system enabled by similarity detection for 
integrating DPP and e-commerce information into the sorting process (related to task 2.1). 
Description 
Project: 101181988 — SORT4CIRC — HORIZON-CL6-2024-CIRCBIO-02 
29 
 
 
 
 
 
Deliverable D2.5 – Summaries of Learning and Deployment Insights 
 
Deliverable Number D2.5 Lead Beneficiary 14 - REFA 
Deliverable Name Summaries of Learning and Deployment Insights 
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level PU - Public 
Due Date (month) 24 Work Package No WP2 
 
 
Deliverable D3.1 – Report on characterisation of textile samples 
 
Deliverable Number D3.1 Lead Beneficiary 15 - TXHO 
Deliverable Name Report on characterisation of textile samples 
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level PU - Public 
Due Date (month) 6 Work Package No WP3 
 
 
Deliverable D3.2 – Report on the selection of best techniques for the recognition of complex 
garments 
 
Deliverable Number D3.2 Lead Beneficiary 8 - CEA 
Deliverable Name Report on the selection of best techniques for the recognition of complex garments 
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
Due Date (month) 18 Work Package No WP3 
 
 
Deliverable D3.3 – Multirange Spectroscopic smart sensing system 
 
Deliverable Number D3.3 Lead Beneficiary 13 - IRIS 
Deliverable Name Multirange Spectroscopic smart sensing system 
A set of usage guidelines will be developed to provide instructions on system setup, configuration, and operation in a 
textile sorting plant. These guidelines will cover key steps for deployment, hardware and software requirements, and 
best practices for integration to enhance efficiency and accuracy while minimizing disruptions (related to task 2.1).  
Description 
A report summarizing key findings from testing and deployment will be delivered. It will highlight performance 
benchmarks, discuss challenges encountered, and provide troubleshooting strategies and solutions to refine future 
iterations and optimize textile sorting (related to task 2.1). 
Description 
A report will be made on the characterisation of the textile samples that will be used for the development of recognition 
techniques (related to task 3.1). 
Description 
Selection of best techniques for the recognition of complex garments for the identification of black textiles, low content 
material detection, chemical contaminants, coatings, fabric structure and multilayer garments (related to task 3.2).  
Project: 101181988 — SORT4CIRC — HORIZON-CL6-2024-CIRCBIO-02 
30 
 
 
 
Type DEM — Demonstrator, 
pilot, prototype 
Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
Due Date (month) 24 Work Package No WP3 
 
 
Deliverable D3.4 – Eco-design guidelines and report on the process to recognise DfD garments 
 
Deliverable Number D3.4 Lead Beneficiary 5 - RESOR 
Deliverable Name Eco-design guidelines and report on the process to recognise DfD garments 
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level PU - Public 
Due Date (month) 24 Work Package No WP3 
 
 
Deliverable D3.5 – Tests report 
 
Deliverable Number D3.5 Lead Beneficiary 4 - RECY 
Deliverable Name Tests report 
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
Due Date (month) 24 Work Package No WP3 
 
 
Deliverable D4.1 – TTRFID assessment 
 
Deliverable Number D4.1 Lead Beneficiary 1 - CU 
Deliverable Name TTRFID assessment 
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
Due Date (month) 6 Work Package No WP4 
 
Description 
Development of self-contained inline analyser and chemometric models for the recognition of PCT in real-time (related 
to task 3.3). 
Description 
This report will gather eco-design guidelines and a description of the process of recognising DfD garments in a relevant 
environment (related to task 3.4). 
Description 
Report to present the tests carried out and the results obtained with the different feedstocks at RECY and PURFI facilities 
(related to task 3.5). 
Description 
Assessment of the eco-friendly, recyclable RFID tags customised for textiles (related to task 4.1). 
Project: 101181988 — SORT4CIRC — HORIZON-CL6-2024-CIRCBIO-02 
31 
 
 
Deliverable D4.2 – TTRFID design and selection guideline 
 
Deliverable Number D4.2 Lead Beneficiary 1 - CU 
Deliverable Name TTRFID design and selection guideline 
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
Due Date (month) 12 Work Package No WP4 
 
 
Deliverable D4.3 – DPP development guidelines 
 
Deliverable Number D4.3 Lead Beneficiary 1 - CU 
Deliverable Name DPP development guidelines 
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level PU - Public 
Due Date (month) 12 Work Package No WP4 
 
 
Deliverable D4.4 – DPP smart contract guidelines for PSFS & PSSR compatibility 
 
Deliverable Number D4.4 Lead Beneficiary 1 - CU 
Deliverable Name DPP smart contract guidelines for PSFS & PSSR compatibility 
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level PU - Public 
Due Date (month) 24 Work Package No WP4 
 
 
Deliverable D4.5 – Tokenised Ecosystem framework analysis and development guideline 
 
Deliverable Number D4.5 Lead Beneficiary 1 - CU 
Deliverable Name Tokenised Ecosystem framework analysis and development guideline 
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
Due Date (month) 30 Work Package No WP4 
 
Description 
The design/procurement guidelines for TTRFID development, including technological characteristics, the economic and 
feasibility analysis and data privacy fulfilment criteria for consumers (related to task 4.1).  
Description 
Guidelines for developing scalable, eco -friendly blockchain architecture for DPP on platforms (e.g. Algorand, IOTA, 
Ethereum) as well as the requirements for data interoperability and API support over TVC. Moreover, API requirements 
for the interoperability of DPP with PSSR technologies will be developed (related to task 4.2).  
Description 
Integration of DPP data retrieval with PSFS & PSSR technologies to enable customised retrieval queries from DPP  
smart contract (related to task 4.3). 
Description 
Form a tokenised ecosystem over TVC for managing CO2 emissions, real-time tracking and incentivising sustainable 
Project: 101181988 — SORT4CIRC — HORIZON-CL6-2024-CIRCBIO-02 
32 
 
 
 
 
 
Deliverable D4.6 – DfD solution development over DPP framework 
 
Deliverable Number D4.6 Lead Beneficiary 5 - RESOR 
Deliverable Name DfD solution development over DPP framework 
Type DEM — Demonstrator, 
pilot, prototype 
Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
Due Date (month) 36 Work Package No WP4 
 
 
Deliverable D4.7 – Guidelines for recyclability and reusability 
 
Deliverable Number D4.7 Lead Beneficiary 5 - RESOR 
Deliverable Name Guidelines for recyclability and reusability 
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level PU - Public 
Due Date (month) 36 Work Package No WP4 
 
 
Deliverable D5.1 – TTRFID technology deployment 
 
Deliverable Number D5.1 Lead Beneficiary 1 - CU 
Deliverable Name TTRFID technology deployment 
Type DEM — Demonstrator, 
pilot, prototype 
Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
Due Date (month) 28 Work Package No WP5 
 
 
Deliverable D5.2 – DPP Blockchain demonstration deployment with tokenised LCA 
assessment dashboard 
 
Deliverable Number D5.2 Lead Beneficiary 15 - TXHO 
Deliverable Name DPP Blockchain demonstration deployment with tokenised LCA assessment dashboard 
Type DEM — Demonstrator, 
pilot, prototype 
Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
practices, including smart contracts. Moreover, the LCA and TEF interoperability framework will be created (related 
to task 4.4). 
Description 
Set up DfD solutions over DPP seamless communication with PSSR technologies focusing on dismantling techniques 
(related to task 4.5). 
Description 
Guidelines for reusability and recycling (related to task 4.5). 
Description 
Upgrading the pilot demonstrator with communication infrastructure with TTRFID (related to task 5.3). 
Project: 101181988 — SORT4CIRC — HORIZON-CL6-2024-CIRCBIO-02 
33 
 
 
 
Due Date (month) 34 Work Package No WP5 
 
 
Deliverable D5.3 – Automatised PSFS pilot 
 
Deliverable Number D5.3 Lead Beneficiary 9 - SEM 
Deliverable Name Automatised PSFS pilot 
Type DEM — Demonstrator, 
pilot, prototype 
Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
Due Date (month) 36 Work Package No WP5 
 
 
Deliverable D5.4 – Upgrade Automatised Sorting Line 
 
Deliverable Number D5.4 Lead Beneficiary 15 - TXHO 
Deliverable Name Upgrade Automatised Sorting Line 
Type DEM — Demonstrator, 
pilot, prototype 
Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
Due Date (month) 36 Work Package No WP5 
 
 
Deliverable D5.5 – Validation of Sorted Feedstock 
 
Deliverable Number D5.5 Lead Beneficiary 4 - RECY 
Deliverable Name Validation of Sorted Feedstock 
Type DEM — Demonstrator, 
pilot, prototype 
Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
Due Date (month) 36 Work Package No WP5 
 
Description 
The DPP Blockchain sample solution is interoperable with TTRFID and PSFS, as well as PSSR technologies in the  
demonstrator. 
Demonstrator LCA dashboard website, which will demonstrate the DPP tokenised capabilities to demonstrate the LCA 
assessment (related to task 5.3). 
Description 
Design and demonstration of an automatised pre-sorting pilot (related to task 5.1). 
Description 
Upgrade, integrate and demonstrate the advanced sorting technologies into an operational automatised sorting line 
(related to task 5.4). 
Description 
Validation of SORT4CIRC sorted feedstock for high-value recycling at recycler's facilities (related to task 5.4). 
Project: 101181988 — SORT4CIRC — HORIZON-CL6-2024-CIRCBIO-02 
34 
 
 
Deliverable D5.6 – Successful recycling of sorted feedstock 
 
Deliverable Number D5.6 Lead Beneficiary 4 - RECY 
Deliverable Name Successful recycling of sorted feedstock 
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level PU - Public 
Due Date (month) 36 Work Package No WP5 
 
 
Deliverable D6.1 – Data collection for SORT4CIRC 
 
Deliverable Number D6.1 Lead Beneficiary 3 - ARIS 
Deliverable Name Data collection for SORT4CIRC 
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
Due Date (month) 15 Work Package No WP6 
 
 
Deliverable D6.2 – Report on environmental impact assessment 
 
Deliverable Number D6.2 Lead Beneficiary 3 - ARIS 
Deliverable Name Report on environmental impact assessment 
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
Due Date (month) 34 Work Package No WP6 
 
 
Deliverable D6.3 – Report on cost-benefit analysis 
 
Deliverable Number D6.3 Lead Beneficiary 3 - ARIS 
Deliverable Name Report on cost-benefit analysis 
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
Due Date (month) 34 Work Package No WP6 
 
Description 
SORT4CIRC sorted feedstock successfully used for high-value recycling at recycler's facilities (related to task 5.4). 
Description 
Report on data collection for the SORT4CIRC value chain, including mass and energy balances (related to task 6.1). 
Description 
Report on the environmental assessment of SORT4CIRC that emphasises GHG emissions along with other impact
categories, determining their reliability (related to task 6.2). 
Description 
Report on the operating cost of the sorting process and profit margin estimation to determine the economic viability of 
the project (related to task 6.3). 
Project: 101181988 — SORT4CIRC — HORIZON-CL6-2024-CIRCBIO-02 
35 
 
 
Deliverable D6.4 – Report on the BM settings 
 
Deliverable Number D6.4 Lead Beneficiary 11 - PSB 
Deliverable Name Report on the BM settings 
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
Due Date (month) 36 Work Package No WP6 
 
 
Deliverable D6.5 – Report on the efficient design and operation of the automated sorting 
system 
 
Deliverable Number D6.5 Lead Beneficiary 11 - PSB 
Deliverable Name Report on the efficient design and operation of the automated sorting system 
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
Due Date (month) 36 Work Package No WP6 
 
 
Deliverable D6.6 – Holistic technology benchmarking among different textile sorting processes 
 
Deliverable Number D6.6 Lead Beneficiary 3 - ARIS 
Deliverable Name Holistic technology benchmarking among different textile sorting processes 
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level PU - Public 
Due Date (month) 36 Work Package No WP6 
 
 
Deliverable D6.7 – Public report on environmental impact assessment 
 
Deliverable Number D6.7 Lead Beneficiary 3 - ARIS 
Deliverable Name Public report on environmental impact assessment 
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level PU - Public 
Due Date (month) 34 Work Package No WP6 
 
Description 
Report describing the analysis and settings of the BM that secures the viability of the business in the long run (related 
to task 6.4). 
Description 
Report including models and recommendations for the efficient design and operation of the automated sorting system 
(related to task 6.5). 
Description 
Comparison of SORT4CIRC against other textile sorting processes based on cost, environmental impact and technical 
aspects (related to task 6.6). 
Description 
Report on the environmental assessment of SORT4CIRC including only non-sensitive data. (related to task 6.2). 
Project: 101181988 — SORT4CIRC — HORIZON-CL6-2024-CIRCBIO-02 
36 
 
 
Deliverable D7.1 – Communication, Dissemination, and Exploitation Plan M3 
 
Deliverable Number D7.1 Lead Beneficiary 7 - CEF 
Deliverable Name Communication, Dissemination, and Exploitation Plan M3 
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level PU - Public 
Due Date (month) 3 Work Package No WP7 
 
 
Deliverable D7.2 – SORT4CIRC Brand Book 
 
Deliverable Number D7.2 Lead Beneficiary 7 - CEF 
Deliverable Name SORT4CIRC Brand Book 
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
Due Date (month) 3 Work Package No WP7 
 
 
Deliverable D7.3 – SORT4CIRC website 
 
Deliverable Number D7.3 Lead Beneficiary 7 - CEF 
Deliverable Name SORT4CIRC website 
Type DEC —Websites, patent 
filings, videos, etc 
Dissemination Level PU - Public 
Due Date (month) 4 Work Package No WP7 
 
 
Deliverable D7.4 – Communication, Dissemination, and Exploitation Plan M12 
 
Deliverable Number D7.4 Lead Beneficiary 7 - CEF 
Deliverable Name Communication, Dissemination, and Exploitation Plan M12 
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level PU - Public 
Due Date (month) 12 Work Package No WP7 
 
Description 
CDE plan detailing strategy for activities to be used by the project and partners involved, including activities, strategic 
events and a tracker to measure and verify KPIs (related to task 7.1). 
Description 
Visual identity guidelines, logo, and templates for communication outputs to be used by partners in their respective  
channels (related to task 7.1). 
Description 
SORT4CIRC project website with pages on the project, updates, partners, deliverables and contact details (related to 
task 7.1). 
Description 
Project: 101181988 — SORT4CIRC — HORIZON-CL6-2024-CIRCBIO-02 
37 
 
 
 
 
 
Deliverable D7.5 – SORT4CIRC policy briefing document M18 
 
Deliverable Number D7.5 Lead Beneficiary 7 - CEF 
Deliverable Name SORT4CIRC policy briefing document M18 
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level PU - Public 
Due Date (month) 18 Work Package No WP7 
 
 
Deliverable D7.6 – Communication, Dissemination, and Exploitation Plan M36 
 
Deliverable Number D7.6 Lead Beneficiary 7 - CEF 
Deliverable Name Communication, Dissemination, and Exploitation Plan M36 
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level PU - Public 
Due Date (month) 36 Work Package No WP7 
 
 
Deliverable D7.7 – SORT4CIRC circular textiles toolbox 
 
Deliverable Number D7.7 Lead Beneficiary 7 - CEF 
Deliverable Name SORT4CIRC circular textiles toolbox 
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level PU - Public 
Due Date (month) 36 Work Package No WP7 
 
 
Deliverable D7.8 – SORT4CIRC policy briefing document M36 
 
Deliverable Number D7.8 Lead Beneficiary 7 - CEF 
Deliverable Name SORT4CIRC policy briefing document M36 
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level PU - Public 
Due Date (month) 36 Work Package No WP7 
 
Compilation of communication activities and materials (i.e. newsletter and social media post) used for dissemination 
and updates on exploitation strategy (related to task 7.1). 
Description 
Policy recommendations for regional, national, and European policymakers (related to task 7.2). 
Description 
Compilation of communication activities and materials (i.e. newsletter and social media post) used for dissemination 
and updates on exploitation strategy (related to task 7.1). 
Description 
Best practices toolbox for project stakeholders to exploit (related to task 7.1). 
Description 
Project: 101181988 — SORT4CIRC — HORIZON-CL6-2024-CIRCBIO-02 
38 
 
 
 
 
 
Deliverable D7.9 – Report on capacity building webinars 
 
Deliverable Number D7.9 Lead Beneficiary 7 - CEF 
Deliverable Name Report on capacity building webinars 
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
Due Date (month) 36 Work Package No WP7 
 
 
Deliverable D7.10 – Summary of clustering activties 
 
Deliverable Number D7.10 Lead Beneficiary 7 - CEF 
Deliverable Name Summary of clustering activties 
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level PU - Public 
Due Date (month) 36 Work Package No WP7 
 
Policy recommendations for regional, national, and European policymakers (related to task 7.2). 
Description 
Report outlining the sessions, insights and participant results of webinars held (related to task 7.3). 
Description 
Clustering activities with sister projects and initatives such as ECOSYSTEX is summarised (related to task 7.1). 
Project: 101181988 — SORT4CIRC — HORIZON-CL6-2024-CIRCBIO-02 
39 
 
 
LIST OF MILESTONES 
 
Milestones 
Grant Preparation (Milestones screen) — Enter the info. 
Milestone 
No 
Milestone Name Work Package No Lead Beneficiary Means of Verification Due Date 
(month) 
1 Completion of mechanical design and 
validation testing at SEM’s facilities 
WP2 9 - SEM Successfully finalise the mechanical design and 
conduct comprehensive validation tests at SEM’s 
facilities to ensure all design specifications and 
performance criteria are met 
10 
2 Real-time monitoring system for textiles 
sorting process available for integrating in 
demonstrator 
WP3 13 - IRIS The prototype should be capable of detecting 
materials with abundance <3%, detecting fabric 
structures with an accuracy >95%, and  
identifying the material with carbon black 
pigments. Affordable configuration of 
spectroscopic techniques integrated into compact 
hardware based on PoC work with VISUM 
Fusion platform and data fusion strategy 
24 
3 Recognition process to identify eco-design 
products 
WP3 5 - RESOR Recognise with an accuracy of >95% of the 
garments made following eco -design guidelines 
at a speed of 1 tonne/hour to enable automatic 
disassembly and sorting. 
24 
4 Eco-Friendly DPP Blockchain-based 
Architecture Framework 
WP4 1 - CU Design documents, architecture diagrams, initial 
setup demonstration and white paper. 
Comprehensive design documents and technical 
specifications for the scalable and eco -friendly 
blockchain architecture, incorporating Semantic 
Web technologies for data interoperability. 
Releases of Del N° 4.3 
12 
5 Integration of DPP Data Retrieval System 
with PSSR 
WP4 1 - CU Integration test results, IoT sensor deployment 
reports, and data retrieval demos. Release of Del 
N° 4.4 
24 
Project: 101181988 — SORT4CIRC — HORIZON-CL6-2024-CIRCBIO-02 
40 
 
 
 
Milestones 
Grant Preparation (Milestones screen) — Enter the info. 
Milestone 
No 
Milestone Name Work Package No Lead Beneficiary Means of Verification Due Date 
(month) 
6 First validation at lab scale of SORT4CIRC 
sorted feedstock for high -value recycling at 
recycler's facilities 
WP5 4 - RECY Feedstocks provided by TXHO meet the 
recyclers' specifications, confirmed by analyses 
of the recycled textile components 
30 
7 TTRFID-enabled textile feeding and DPP 
blockchain interoperability 
WP5 1 - CU Recognition of TTRFID in demonstrator. 
Interoperability of PSSR technologies with DPP 
blockchain 
32 
8 Gathering inventory data for mass and energy 
balances is complete 
WP6 3 - ARIS Collection of mass and energy balances. Data 
collection from primary and secondary  data 
sources through site visits, interviews, 
questionnaires, desk research, industrial and 
commercial reports, and academic and grey 
literature. Completion of D6.1. 
15 
 
 
LIST OF CRITICAL RISKS 
 
Critical risks & risk management strategy 
Grant Preparation (Critical Risks screen) — Enter the info. 
Risk 
number 
Description Work Package 
No(s) 
Proposed Mitigation Measures 
1 SKU retrieval algorithm cannot distinguish between 
generic products and specific products due to a large 
gap between the training data set and data recorded 
in the industrial process (Likelihood: High, Severity: 
Medium) 
WP2 The dataset used for training should be pre-filtered, specifically crafted, and annotated for 
that purpose. 
Project: 101181988 — SORT4CIRC — HORIZON-CL6-2024-CIRCBIO-02 
41 
 
 
 
Critical risks & risk management strategy 
Grant Preparation (Critical Risks screen) — Enter the info. 
Risk 
number 
Description Work Package 
No(s) 
Proposed Mitigation Measures 
2 Lack of possibility to analyse some of the textiles’ 
parameters of interest due to the high complexity of 
samples (Likelihood: Medium, Severity: Low) 
WP3 A wide range of optical techniques will be considered for the analysis, and simultaneous use 
of these techniques will be made. Many partners of this consortium are experienced in the 
use of optical techniques. Moreover, the creation of an extensive database of samples will 
contribute to mitigating this risk. 
3 Limited sorting rate due to acquisition and analysis 
(Likelihood: Medium, Severity: Medium) 
WP3 Optimise material recognition algorithms to have a near real-time recognition speed 
4 Over cost in computing power (for developing the 
ensemble models) (Likelihood: Medium, Severity: 
Medium) 
WP3 Migration (if required) to the cloud to use outsourced parallel computing resources. 
5 Limited sensitivity of the thread recognition 
(Likelihood: High, Severity: Low) 
WP3 An identification system at the thread or garment level will be implemented. 
6 Delays in TTRFID tag development due to technical 
challenges (Likelihood: Low, Severity: High) 
WP4 Conduct preliminary research, benefiting from RTL 04 based technologies and experts in the 
team, and set realistic timelines with buffer periods 
7 Blockchain architecture not meeting scalability or 
eco-friendliness requirements (Likelihood: Low, 
Severity: High) 
WP4 Focusing on compatible blockchain platforms (e.g., Algorand) with scalability 
characteristics, conducting testing, consulting with blockchain experts and benefiting from 
the EBSI infrastructure. 
8 Integration difficulties between DPP data retrieval 
system and PSSR technologies (Likelihood: Low, 
Severity: High) 
WP4 Fulfilling standards IEC 62264: (ISA -95) and IEC 62443: (ISA -99) and protocols like 
Collaborate with IoT and automation experts, conducting phased integration, and performing 
extensive testing and benefiting from CIRPASS-2 outcomes. 
9 Interoperability Challenges (Likelihood: Medium, 
Severity: High) 
WP4 Difficulty in achieving seamless integration with legacy systems, other blockchains, and  
different IoT devices will be fulfilled with tasks 4.2.2-4 
10 Validation of sorted feedstock for high -value 
recycling at recycler’s facilities fails (Likelihood: 
Medium, Severity: High) 
WP5 Carry out regular tests, investigate the causes of deviations, draw up plans to optimise the 
production process and implement them in practice. 
11 Delayed data mining due to limited experimental 
progress or confidentiality reasons (Likelihood: 
Medium, Severity: High) 
WP6 Use of process simulation tools or literature available data to determine mass & energy 
balances for implementation in the cost-benefit analysis and LCA model. 
Project: 101181988 — SORT4CIRC — HORIZON-CL6-2024-CIRCBIO-02 
42 
 
 
 
Critical risks & risk management strategy 
Grant Preparation (Critical Risks screen) — Enter the info. 
Risk 
number 
Description Work Package 
No(s) 
Proposed Mitigation Measures 
12 Scarce data of capital expenditure estimation 
(Likelihood: Medium, Severity: Medium) 
WP6 A factorial approach will be used: the cost objects are estimated as a function of the purchased 
equipment cost; the parameters and factors used in those cost objects-purchased equipment 
cost correlations are obtained from suppliers, vendors or manufacturers and published articles 
or white papers. 
13 Access to valid and reliable data sources for value 
chain mapping and system modelling (Likelihood: 
Low, Severity: Medium) 
WP6 Triangulation and cross -verifying the acquired data from multiple sources. These sources 
may include primary ones, derived from unstructured interviews, and secondary ones, 
sourced from literature, technical reports, and grey literature. 
14 Low attendance at the online circular toolbox launch 
event (Likelihood: Low, Severity: Low) 
WP7 Start promotion early, leveraging SORT4CIRC and CEF’s connection with the CCRI 
community to explore potential synergies with other initiatives to organise joint events and 
maximise the attendance of key players. Relevant presentations of in-person events will also 
be available online for interested participants who could not attend. 
15 Lack of relevant content in for the webinars/training 
sessions for participants (Likelihood: Low, Severity: 
Low) 
WP7 Alignment and collaboration with other CCRI networks, ensuring our content is relevant and 
distinct from existing ones. Leverage existing expertise, networks, partner organisations, and 
other channels to gain insights into participant needs, validate the relevance of topics for the 
webinars, and tailor each session to relevant WPs. 
16 Low awareness of the SORT4CIRC project 
(Likelihood: Low, Severity: Low) 
WP7 Leverage connections with initiatives such as the CCRI, DEFINITE -CCRI, CircularInvest, 
CCRI CSA, SOLSTICE and other projects to build awareness of the project. Participation in 
external events will also help build the project's profile. 
Project: 101181988 — SORT4CIRC — HORIZON-CL6-2024-CIRCBIO-02 
43 
 
 
PROJECT REVIEWS 
 
Project Reviews 
Grant Preparation (Reviews screen) — Enter the info. 
Review 
No 
Timing 
(month) 
Location Comments 
RV1 21 To be confirmed To be confirmed. After the submission of the mid-term technical report. 
RV2 36 To be confirmed To be confirmed. 
[101181988] [SORT4CIRC] Page 1 on 42 Confidential 
 
 
 
#@APP-FORM-HERIAIA@# 
 
TABLE OF HISTORY OF CHANGES 
 Version 
(date) 
Annex 1 Part A 
Beneficiaries • The Rennes Business School former Beneficiary 11, has been replaced by Paris 
School of Business (PSB) PIC 944056866, due to the leading researcher (Reza 
Zanjirani Farahani) changing position to this new institution and Rennes Business 
School does not have the qualified expertise to carry out the activities 
• An affiliated entity - Circularity Gap Solutions B.V. PIC 877344631 (CGS) - has 
been added on beneficiary 7 CEF 
15/1/25 
• Following the change in ownership of SOEX, the legal entity of the project 
coordinator has been changed to Interzero Circular Solutions (IZCS), PIC 
890257368. In addition, an affiliated entity to the project coordinator has been added 
IZ Circular Textiles GmbH (IZCT), PIC 873039092. 
24/2/25 
• Interzero Circular Solutions Germany GmbH (IZCS) has handed over the project 
coordination to Constructor University Bremen GmbH (CU). 
• Interzero Circular Solutions Germany GmbH (IZCS) has been terminated. 
• IZ Circular Textiles GmbH (IZCT) has been terminated. 
• Textile House for EURO TRADE, s.r.o. (TXHO) PIC 870613413 has been added to 
the Consortium and will take over the responsibilities of IZCT. 
16/7/25 
Financial 
information 
• The project costs of affiliated partner 7.1 CGS have been transferred from 
beneficiary 7 CEF 
• ARIS will declare some SME owner unit costs 
15/1/25 
• The former SOEX budget has been split between IZCS and IZCT 24/2/25 
• The full budget allocation for IZCS has been transferred to CU 
• The full budget allocation for IZCT has been transferred to TXHO 
16/7/25 
Researchers • The researchers’ table has been revised, due to a partner change of beneficiary 11 
and the two people belonging to beneficiary 10 PURFI are not qualified as 
researchers. 
15/1/25 
Workplan • WP7 – affiliated partner 7.1 CGS role has been added to tasks 7.1, 7.2 and 7.3 15/1/25 
• Task 7.1 has been revised to also include clustering activities 24/1/25 
• Task 1.2 has been revised to also include reporting on the activities of the ethics 
mentor. 
7/2/25 
• The role of SOEX has been split between IZCS and IZCT 
o IZCS will carry out WP1 
o IZCT will take over all other tasks formerly assigned to SOEX in the other 
WPs 
24/2/25 
• Links between tasks and deliverables have been added in the task description 24/03/25 
• All WP1 Tasks have been handed over from IZCS to CU. 
• All WP tasks for IZCT have been handed over to TXHO 
16/7/25 
Effort • The person months have been revised for beneficiary 7 CEF and affiliated partner
7.1 CGS 
• This makes a total of 71,1 PM for WP7 and a total of 574.51 PM for the project 
15/1/25 
• The former PM distribution of SOEX has been split between IZCS and IZCT 24/2/25 
• The PM allocation for WP1 has been transferred from IZCS to CU. 16/7/25 
Deliverables • One mid-term and final data management plan has been added (D1.7 at M18 and 
D.11 at M36) 
15/1/25 
SORT4CIRC - Intelligent Textile SORTing to enable CIRCularity 
[101181988] [SORT4CIRC] Page 2 on 42 Confidential 
 
 
 • One mid-term policy briefing document has been added at M18 (D7.5) 
• The dissemination level of D1.3, D1.7, D1.11, D3.1 and D3.4 has been changed to 
public 
 
• Type of D1.2, D1.4 and D1.7 have been changed to DMP 
• 2 public deliverables have been added to WP2 (D2.4-5) 
• Dissemination level of D4.3 and D4.4 has been changed to public 
• 1 public deliverable has been added to WP5 (D5.6) 
• 1 public deliverable has been added to WP6 (D6.7) 
24/1/25 
• Numbering of WP1 deliverables has been revised due to the grouping of deliverables 
• Deliverable type changed to Data Management Plans has been revised to DMP (new 
D1.3, D1.7 and D1.11 
7/2/25 
• The deliverables of SOEX have been split between IZCS and IZCT 
o IZCS will be responsible for all WP1 deliverables 
o IZCT will be responsible for all other former SOEX deliverables. 
24/2/25 
• The Communication, Dissemination, and Exploitation Plan at M24 has been deleted 
• The Communication, Dissemination, and Exploitation Plans deliverables have been 
changed to public (D7.4 and D7.6) 
02/04/25 
• The Communication, Dissemination, and Exploitation Plans deliverable at M3 have 
been changed to public (D7.1) 
04/04/25 
• The deliverables of IZCS have been transferred to CU and therefore CU will be 
responsible for all deliverables in WP1. 
• The deliverables of IZCT have been transferred to TXHO and therefore TXHO will 
be responsible for all deliverables in WP5. 
16/7/25 
Annex 1 Part B 
All parts • SOEX has been changed to IZCS or IZCT in relevant parts. 24/2/25 
• IZCS has been replaced by CU in all relevant parts. 
• IZCT has been replaced by TXHO in all relevant parts. 
16/7/25 
Section 1   
1.1.3 • Ambition 1 has been revised to stress better why manual feeding and unfolding of 
the garments at the first stage of the pilot system is needed. As the first stage 
focuses on sorting for the reuse market, the efficiency of AI algorithms for type and 
quality detection is vital. Although the manual feeding mechanisms are proposed, 
due to the efficiency of quality detection for the next stages, the rework for manual 
inspection of clothes will be avoided. So, the throughput of the system will 
maintain both higher speeds and quality in comparison with other literature 
solutions like falling models 
15/1/25 
1.2.1 • The technical robustness of AI-based systems has been detailed in Challenge 1 and 
Challenge 2. 
• Figure 2 has been modified for replacing the layout of TXHO in replacement of 
IZCT 
• Figure 3 has been cited for the reference. 
• Figures 3, 4, 5, 6 has updated to Figures 4, 5, 6, 7 accordingly after updating the 
figures’ ordering and numbering. 
15/1/25 
1.2.2 • TXHO engagement in initiatives and relations with other projects have been added. 16/7/25 
Section 2 • Figure 7 has updated to Figure 8 and Figure 9 has been added for “Communication 
& dissemination tools and proposed dissemination” accordingly after updating the 
figures’ ordering and numbering. 
16/7/25 
Section 3   
3.1.1 • The figure 8 has been updated to consider the partner change of beneficiary 11 15/1/25 
3.2.1 • The Gantt chart has been revised to consider new deliverables and change of partner 
for beneficiary 11 
15/1/25 
• The Gantt chart has been revised to consider new deliverables 24/1/25 
[101181988] [SORT4CIRC] Page 3 on 42 Confidential 
 
 
 • The Gantt chart has been revised to consider the change in the project coordinator 
short names 
24/2/25 
• The Gantt chart has been revised to consider revised deliverables 7/2/25 
• The Gantt chart has been corrected to consider links between tasks and deliverables 24/3/25 
• The Gantt chart has been corrected to consider the erased deliverable 02/04/25 
• The Gantt chart has been corrected to consider the change of coordination from IZCS 
to CU. 
• The Gantt chart has been corrected to consider the change of responsible tasks of 
IZCT to TXHO. 
• The Figure caption for Gannt chart has changed from Figure 8 to Figure 11 after 
ordering the former figures accordingly. 
• Figure 11 has been modified for replacing the layout of TXHO in replacement of 
IZCT 
16/7/25 
Table 3.1h • Reference to Wolfen has been replaced by the term “sorting plant” 
• Purchase costs of CEF have been revised 
15/1/25 
• Amount of travel costs of CEF have been corrected 7/2/25 
• Purchase costs of IZCT has been revised 24/2/25 
• The following statement has been added “The equipment costs reported are 
depreciation costs only”. 
• Travel costs of IZCT for face-to-face meetings with each individual Consortium 
partner has been clarified. These are technical meetings at partner locations and are 
related to WP3, WP4 and WP5 
10/03/25 
• The budget of 1.1 IZCT has been transferred to TXHO. 
• The Budget of CU has been revised to include the WP1 tasks budget from IZCT 
former PM tasks. The travel costs have been added to CU table with more detailed 
information. 
• The Budget for CEA has been corrected for Travel C.1 Travel and subsistence and 
C.3 Other goods, works and services 
16/7/25 
3.2.1 • Figure 9 has been updated to consider change of partner for beneficiary 11 
• The affiliated entity Circularity Gap Solutions B.V. has been added in beneficiary 7 
CEF description 
15/1/25 
• The text describing the composition of the partnership has been revised to include 
the affiliated entity. 
7/2/25 
• The text describing the composition of the partnership has been revised to include 
the additional affiliated entity. 
• The figure 8 and 9 have been updated 
24/2/25 
• The text describing the composition of the partnership has been revised 10/03/25 
• Figures 11(old version 8) and 12 (old version 9) have been updated to consider the 
change of project coordination from IZCS to CU and also IZCT to TXHO. 
• The Figure caption for Gannt chart has changed from Figures 8,9 to Figures 11,12 
after ordering the former figures accordingly. 
16/7/25 
Section 4   
4.1 • Addition of ethics section 15/1/25 
• Statement has been added in ethics section 24/1/25 
• Role of Ethics Mentor has been described 7/2/25 
• The following statement has been added “The Consortium acknowledge the ethics 
issues identified in the Summary Report related to HUMANS, PERSONAL DATA, 
ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH AND SAFETY, and ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE” 
24/3/25 
 
 
Table of contents 
1 Excellence ............................................................................................................................................................. 6