3.3  CONSORTIUM AS A WHOLE .............................................................................................................. .............................. 32
3.4 RESOURCES TO BE COMMITTED ............................................................................................................................. ......... 33 
Table 3.4 b – ‘Other direct cost’ items (travel, equipment, infrastructure, goods and services) ..................................... 33  
  
    
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
Background  
Increasing industrial uptake of project findings is at the heart of project SPRING. It is the essential building block 
for ensuring greater impact of SPIRE projects and therefore progress towards the SPIRE roadmap goals of 
increased resource and energy efficiency in the EU process industries.  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3246540 - 28/06/2017 
    
767412 -  SPRING – PART B      Page 4  
Instead of focusing on a small cluster of projects, SPRING has been developed to provide the mechanism to 
enhance the impact of all SPIRE projects.   
  
Objectives  
Project SPRING’s objective is to increase progress towards the SPIRE goals and enhance return on investment in 
projects by addressing the needs of those who make the decisions to adopt process innovations in industry and 
barriers to their adoption. It will do this by providing guidance to project participants, decision makers in 
industry and broader SPIRE stakeholders, enabling them collectively to:   
1. Improve the articulation of the value of project exploitable outputs   
2. Improve the articulation of industry needs and barriers-to-uptake of exploitable outputs   
3. Improve the mapping of project value to industry needs   
4. Identify policy gaps and recommendations to improve project impact  
  
Approach  
To address these objectives, the project will deliver six sets of exploitable outputs:  
A – Guidance on best practice of how to measure progress, impact and success of SPIRE projects.  
B – Frameworks for getting different levels of project results to the right audience through the 
spire2030.eu portal   
C – A model for mapping project outputs to industry needs, through thematic, interactive industry 
workshops, expert input and technology scanning methods.  
D – Guidance for understanding business barriers to uptake, including best practice for enabling good 
decision making when evaluating project outputs.  
E – A package of training and network groups to upskill SPIRE project participants  
F – Identification of policy gaps and future SPIRE needs  
The SPRING consortium of six partners represent seven SPIRE projects, which will be used as case studies: 
ProPAT, Sharebox, IbD, EPOS, COPRO, STYLE, and DREAM. SPRING will develop the exploitable outputs 
through a series of work streams that research best practice; consult with stakeholders; test and validate the 
case studies; generate guidance and frameworks; and disseminate back to the SPIRE community.  
The SPRING consortium is industry biased, with an additional Industry Advisory Board to further ensure that the 
work is focused on the barriers to industrial uptake. Through the inclusion of A.SPIRE in the consortium, SPRING 
will help direct the existing resources of the PPP, to work more effectively for its members, the Commission 
and stakeholders, though its communications, website portal and events.   
Working across the whole innovation eco-system, SPRING will ensure that outputs from all SPIRE projects can 
achieve their full potential for industrial uptake within the European process industries.  
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3246540 - 28/06/2017 
    
767412 -  SPRING – PART B      Page 5  
  
  
 
  
1.  EXCELLENCE
1.1  OBJECTIVES   
  
There is potential to increase the impact of collaborative projects within and beyond the SPIRE Public Private 
Partnership.  
  
Collaborative projects aim to get their findings adopted by industry at various levels:   
  
   
  
NETWORK GROUPS 
  
 GUIDANCE 
  
THEMATIC WORKSHOPS 
  
 HIGH 
- 
LEVEL  
FRAMEWORK FOR  
CAPTURING  
OUTPUTS 
  
FRAMEWORK FOR  
CAPTURING  
EDUCATIONAL  
TRAINING  
RESOURCES 
  
EDUCATION AND  
TRAINING  
PROVIDERS 
  
SPIRE  
INDUSTRIES 
  
Increased Uptake  
→ 
  
Enhanced Impact 
  
SPRING 
  
SPIRE  
Projects 
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3246540 - 28/06/2017 
    
767412 -  SPRING – PART B      Page 6  
 
  
Each of these levels involves a different set of barriers to uptake (which are developed in Section 1.3.1).  
  
Some recommendations from projects may be implemented by organisations other than industrial 
manufacturers, i.e. academia, Research and Technology Organisations (RTOs), policy makers. Successful 
exploitation, however, should be primarily measured by industrial uptake, as this is how SPIRE can meet its 
vision for resource and energy efficiency improvements1. Other organisations are enablers of industrial 
exploitation and impact.  
Consequently, Project SPRING’s objective is to increase progression towards the SPIRE goals and enhance 
project return on investment by addressing the needs and barriers of those who make the decisions to adopt 
process innovations in industry. It will do this by providing guidance to project participants, decision makers 
in industry and broader SPIRE stakeholders to:   
1. Improve the articulation of the value of project exploitable outputs   
2. Improve the articulation of industry needs and barriers-to-uptake of exploitable outputs   
3. Improve the mapping of project value to industry needs   
4. Identify policy gaps and recommendations to improve project impact  
  
This can be simplified as:  
                                                           
1 https://www.spire2030.eu/what/walking-the-spire-roadmap/spire-vision   
1) 
 Industry  
involved in case studies  
within a project consortium 
  
2) 
 Manufacturing sites belonging  
to those within a project  
consortium, but external to the  
case studies 
  
3) 
 EU industry in the same sector,  
within the SPIRE membership 
  
4) 
 EU industry in different process  
sectors,  
within the SPIRE  
membership 
  
5) 
 EU process industries external  
to SPIRE membership/ network 
  
6) 
 Global process industries 
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3246540 - 28/06/2017 
    
767412 -  SPRING – PART B      Page 7  
 
Project SPRING aims to tackle these questions to provide a better structure for enhancing the impact of all 
SPIRE projects, with the aid of a sub-set of Case Study SPIRE projects, representatives of which make up the 
SPRING project consortium.
1.2  RELATION TO THE WORK PROGRAMME   
  
Project SPRING addresses the topic “Support for the enhancement of the impact of SPIRE PPP projects”.  
Sustainable Process Industry through Resource and energy Efficiency (SPIRE) is a Public Private Partnership 
which aims to contribute to the rejuvenation, growth and sustainability of the European Process Industries. 
Members of SPIRE represent process industries such as cement, ceramics, chemicals, engineering, minerals and 
ores, non-ferrous metals, steel and water. Together these sectors account for 20% of total European industry 
as measured by both turnover and employees.  
The first projects from the SPIRE PPP came out of 2014 calls, with 53 projects funded to-date. The following 
table details a selection of the 2014-2016 projects and their ‘Technical Field’:  
    
Technical Field  Project Title  Full Title  Call 
year  
Duration  
-months  
Sustainability Tools  STYLE  Sustainability Toolkit for easY Life-cycle 
Evaluation  
2014  24  
Sustainability Tools  SAMT  Sustainability assessment methods and tools to 
support decision-making in the process 
industries  
2014  24  
Sustainability Tools  MEASURE  Metrics for Sustainability Assessment in 
European Process Industries  
2014  15  
Process Control  CONSENS  Integrated Control and Sensing for Sustainable 
Operation of Flexible Intensified Processes  
2014  36  
Process Control  icspec  in-line Cascade laser spectrometer for process 
control  
2014  36  
Process Control  ProPAT  Robust and affordable process control 
technologies for improving standards and 
optimising industrial operations  
2014  48  
1 
. What useful findings  
are in SPIRE projects? 
  
2 
. What do the SPIRE  
industries need? 
  
3 
. How to match  
project findings to 
  
the  
industry needs? 
  
4 
. What should be done  
to bridge any gaps? 
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3246540 - 28/06/2017 
    
767412 -  SPRING – PART B      Page 8  
Process Control  RECOBA  Cross-sectorial real-time sensing, advanced 
control and optimisation of batch processes 
saving energy and raw materials  
2014  36  
Process Control  DISIRE  Integrated Process Control based on  
Distributed In-Situ Sensors into Raw Material 
and Energy Feedstock  
2014  36  
Downstream Processing  PRODIAS  PROcessing Diluted Aqueous Systems  2014  48  
Solids handling  IbD  Intensified by Design® for the intensification of 
processes involving solids handling  
2015  36  
Energy and resource 
management systems  
EPOS  Enhanced energy and resource Efficiency and 
Performance in process industry Operations via 
onsite and cross-sectorial Symbiosis  
2015  48  
Energy and resource 
management systems  
MAESTRI  Total resource and energy efficiency 
management system for process industries  
2015  48  
Energy and resource 
management systems  
SHAREBOX  Secure Management Platform for Shared 
Process Resources  
2015  48  
Energy and resource 
management systems  
SYMBIOPTIMA  Human-mimetic approach to the integrated 
monitoring, management and optimization of a 
symbiotic cluster of smart production units  
2015  36  
 …    
Circular economy  BAMB, CABRISS, FISSAC, RESLAG, RESYNTEX  2014    
Use of renewables  MefCO2, MOBILE FLIP, SteamBIO  2014    
Process Intensification  ADREM, MEMERE, PRINTCR3DIT, ROMEO, TERRA  2015    
Recovery Technologies  ADIR, REE4EU, REMAGHIC  2015    
Use of heat recovery  I-ThERM, Indus3Es, SUSPIRE, TASIO  2015    
Industrial Furnace Design  DREAM, IMPROOF, VULKANO  2016    
Water management 
systems  
INSPIREWATER, ReWaCEM, SPOTVIEW  2016    
Valorisation of waste heat  DRYficiency, Smartrec  2016    
Valorisation of 
bioresources  
Bio4Products, KARMA2020, REHAP  2016    
Use of CO/CO…  CarbonNext  2016    
Plant-wide monitoring  COCOP, CoPro, FUDIPO, MONSOON  2016    
Business Models  INSPIRE  2016    
Table 1 – SPIRE Projects 2014-2016 Grouped by Technical Field  
  
The impact of SPIRE projects can be enhanced by clustering under their high level technical fields. As an 
exemplar, the three SPIRE-04-2014 Sustainability Tools CSA projects – STYLE, SAMT and MEASURE – 
demonstrated that collaborating across projects can be beneficial for the European Commission (EC), the SPIRE 
community, stakeholders and the projects themselves. The project coordinators met prior to kick-off to share 
information on project activities and timelines and to agree focus areas for the different projects. This ensured 
that stakeholder communications (e.g. press releases, questionnaires, conference talks) were coordinated, had 
greater reach and impact and avoided confusion; joint events and workshops were held and projects could 
focus their efforts in different areas, rather than wasting effort, and duplicating work. Given BRITEST’s role as 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3246540 - 28/06/2017 
    
767412 -  SPRING – PART B      Page 9  
coordinator of STYLE, learning from this clustered approach will be taken into SPRING to advise on additional 
areas for potential clustering and good practice for successful clustered activities.  
Although some clustering of activities can be easily done across projects within the same call, there is further 
value to be had from clustering activities across projects funded through different calls. By mapping high level 
outputs from SPIRE projects, SPRING will make it easier to pull together alternative collections of projects, 
which may not have previously been linked, leading to thematic workshops and linking of outputs from these 
projects to industry needs. The mapping should also help identify synergies with other H2020 programme 
themes and topics, such as BBI, Circular Economy, Water, Energy etc.  
The SPRING consortium has strong links to existing technology transfer activities and organisations including  
SME’s (e.g. Enterprise Europe Network (EEN), UK Knowledge Transfer Network, regional cluster organisations, 
European Technology Platforms and National Technology Platforms such as SusChem etc.). Trials will be 
conducted within SPRING to partner with these organisations for the running of thematic workshops and as a 
conduit for ‘translated’ project outputs.  
The challenge to focus on knowledge transfer and training issues regarding present and future industrial 
workers is being addressed in SPRING at two different levels:  
- Mapping of high level outputs and development of a framework for the spire2030.eu portal provides a 
mechanism for directing more people towards relevant output from projects  
- Drawing from the experiences of the SusChem Educate to Innovate programme2 and additional input 
from SPRING academic stakeholders to develop a framework for capturing educational and training 
resources developed in SPIRE projects on the spire2030.eu website portal  
  
Project SPRING addresses the following Key Actions from the SPIRE Roadmap:  
KA 5.1: Identification, benchmarking and cross-sectorial transfer of good energy and resource efficiency 
solutions and practices  
KA 5.3: Develop skills and education programmes required for the development and deployment of novel 
energy and resource efficiency solutions and practices  
KA 5.4: Enhancing innovation and entrepreneurial skills and culture  
  
    
                                                           
2 http://www.suschem.org/priorities/education/educate-to-innovate.aspx, accessed 16/01/2017  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3246540 - 28/06/2017 
    
767412 -  SPRING – PART B      10
1.3   CONCEPT AND METHODOLOGY, QUALITY OF THE COORDINATION AND SUPPORT MEASURES  
  
 
1.3.1 – PRINCIPALS AND CONCEPT  
The principle behind Project SPRING is to tackle the barriers-to-uptake of project findings. At a high level, these 
barriers can be classified as:  
- Awareness – industry unaware of project findings; project unaware of other developments happening 
in parallel  
- Understanding – project findings difficult to understand or information fragmented, which may be the 
fault of communication and the ability to effectively tailor communications to the different target 
audiences  
- Insufficient skills in industry to evaluate and implement project findings  
- Specificity – project targeted at niche sector, insufficient translation of broader learning and 
transferability to wider applications  
- Findings thought to be irrelevant or insufficiently innovative  
- Lack of consistency in metrics used – difficult to compare or evaluate different technological solutions  
- Lack of buy-in from industry decision makers  
- Value perceived does not match effort/expense required (too costly)  
- Risk of ‘new’ outweighs low risk implementation of known tech  
- Perceived patent barriers  
- Lack of appropriate incentives (policy ‘carrots’)  
- Lack of appropriate regulations (policy ‘sticks’)  
- Specific SME challenges (both for exploiting innovations on their own plants and getting their 
technologies into big industry)  
- Many public funded projects have been further limited by the dissemination and exploitation tasks only 
being fully developed at the end of the projects, by which point, the funding ceases.   
  
    
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3246540 - 28/06/2017 
    
767412 -  SPRING – PART B      Page 11  
Page  
Consequently, the concept of SPRING is to research, test and deliver six sets of outputs, which tackle the 
primary barriers-to-uptake:  
  
Output 
Set  
Outputs  
A  Guidance on how to measure progress/ impact/ success of projects  
B  Framework for getting different levels of project results to the right audience  
- High, categorized level for getting targeted awareness through guided framework on the 
spire2030.eu portal  
- Deeper level for extracting output for training/ teaching resources  
C  Model for mapping project outputs against industry needs  
-  Through thematic interactive industry workshops, expert input and technology scanning 
methods  
D  Guidance for understanding business barriers to uptake  
-  Includes best practice for enabling good decision making when evaluating project outputs 
(include risk and visualisation) -  SPIRE SME Working Group  
E  Upskilled SPIRE project participants, better able to articulate exploitable output value and increase 
collaboration between projects  
- Training workshop and presentation package for communicating value and impact with 
Commission, Industry and broader stakeholders  
- SPIRE Coordinators Network Group  
- SPIRE Sustainability Practitioners Working Group  
F  Policy gaps and future SPIRE needs recommendations report - 
 Developed through research/ workshop/ other activities  
  
The background to each of these Outputs is detailed in Section 1.3.2.  
  
  
 
 1.3.2 – APPROACHES AND ACTIVITIES  
Project SPRING has been based on a top-down approach; mapping required outputs against overall objectives 
and the barriers-to-uptake; then plotting activities and tasks to deliver the outputs. An overview of this 
structure is presented in the following diagram:  
 
 
  
  
PROJECT SPRING MAPPI 
 NG OF KEY ACTIVITIES 
   
TO OUTPUTS AND OBJE 
 CTIVES 
   
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3246540 - 28/06/2017 
 
 
767412 -  SPRING – PART B      Page 12  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3246540 - 28/06/2017 
    
767412 -  SPRING – PART B      Page 14  
The Work Packages for SPRING sit in a matrix across the work streams to deliver the output sets.  
WP1 (Coordination and Management), led by BRITEST, oversees the project and the flow and 
interrelationships of tasks through the work streams.  
WP2 (Research), led by LEEDS, gathers knowledge from partners within the consortium, the SPIRE and FoF 
projects that they represent, stakeholders in the SPIRE community and broader project and policy research to 
propose best practice methods to be tested in WP3 (as illustrated in Figure 1 - Example Work Stream for 
generating Project SPRING outputs).  
WP3 (Testing & Validation), led by IRIS, takes the recommended methods from WP2, tests their use and value 
in the case study projects and provides the learning and project perspective into WP4.  
WP4 (Output Generation), led by BRITEST, takes the experience from WP3 and research from WP2 to develop 
the exploitable outputs for SPRING. These include guidance for current and future SPIRE projects, frameworks 
for the spire2030.eu website and training.  
WP5 (Stakeholder Engagement), led by A.SPIRE, provides a route to gather input from the broader SPIRE 
community and for the outputs and best practice from the project to be widely communicated and 
disseminated to the stakeholders.  
  
A typical work stream for SPRING, and its interactions across the Work Packages, is shown in the following 
diagram:  
 
Figure Table 21 – -  Example Work Stream for generating Project SPRING outputsExample Work Stream for generating 
Project SPRING outputs   
  
What do we  
know in the  
consortium? 
  
What other  
methods are  
there? (WP2) 
  
Test on Case  
Studies (WP3) 
  
Develop  
methodology/  
guidance/  
framework/  
training (WP4) 
  
Disseminate to  
stakeholders  
WP 
( 
 5) 
  
Industry Advisory Board  
Chaired by INEOS 
( 
 ) 
  
Stakeholder Clusters 
  
e.g. Academics 
( 
 ) 
  
Consult  
stakeholders  
5) 
WP 
( 
   
check 
  
Example topic: 
  
How to measure progress/ impact/ success? 
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3246540 - 28/06/2017 
    
767412 -  SPRING – PART B      Page 15  
  
Output Background  
A – Metrics Guidance: Many different metrics are used by projects, SPIRE and the EC to monitor progress on 
projects, assess their success and their ultimate expected impact. Some metrics are established internally to 
the projects, others from questionnaires sent out to project partners and industry organisations. For the past 
two years, Impact Workshops have been organised in Brussels to help collate impact metrics across SPIRE 
projects. However, these have often demonstrated that the projects measure impact in different ways and 
attempts to collate mixtures of absolute and percentage metrics can result in meaningless or unrealistic 
numbers. SPRING aims to review metrics in use across SPIRE projects, those requested from SPIRE and the EC 
(i.e. the SPIRE KPIs as detailed below), and those used internally by industry, to establish best practice 
guidelines. This activity will also incorporate recommendations from the SPIRE-04-2014 projects regarding 
the use of sustainability metrics within SPIRE projects.   
SPIRE Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) at PPP implementation level are:   
• New systems and technologies developed in the relevant sectors   
• Participation and benefits for SMEs   
• Contribution to the reduction of energy use  
• Contribution to the reduction in the use of material resources   
• New high-skilled profiles and new curricula developed   
• Private investment mobilised in relation to the PPP activities   
• Contributions to new standards   
   
SPIRE Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) at project impact level are:   
• Scale of reduction in energy, material resources and waste   
• Project results taken-up for further investments   
• Trainings for a higher quality workforce   
• Patents and activities leading to standardisation  
  
B – Frameworks for Results Translation: ASPIRE have recently upgraded their website portal to act as a 
Knowledge Platform for SPIRE members and projects. At present, the platform allows for project search via 
Technical Field and soon to be introduced key-word search. SPRING partners will investigate and develop best 
practice approaches for structures to enable outputs from SPIRE projects to be more accessible for two 
specific audiences:  
i) Industry looking for opportunities to improve their manufacturing operations ii) 
Education and training providers looking for source material from innovative projects   
For audience (i), the framework is intended to use a decision tree structure to direct users to projects 
which they may not have previously been aware of. Instead of users having to be proactive in 
reviewing a large list of project abstracts, or lucky enough to have selected a suitable keyword, the 
framework should allow genericised outputs from projects to be linked to the characteristics of the 
industry manufacturing process (e.g. innovations relating to specific operating temperature ranges, or 
materials of construction, or processing scales, or addressing specific control issues etc.).  
For audience (ii), the framework structure will contain a minimum standardisation threshold in term of 
quality, format and content.  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3246540 - 28/06/2017 
    
767412 -  SPRING – PART B      Page 16  
SPRING will work with Case Study projects to see how much translation of their existing outputs is 
required to meet the frameworks’ needs. Guidance will also be produced to allow current and future 
projects to structure their outputs to fit into the proposed frameworks.  
C – Model for Outputs/ Needs Mapping: Intentions have been expressed for SPIRE to run thematic workshop 
to bring different SPIRE projects together with stakeholders3. Instead of just starting with a theme and 
getting a group of projects to present their outputs in a seminar format, SPRING partners have planned a 
series of activities that will culminate in thematic workshops. For a workshop to be successful in increasing 
industrial uptake of project outputs, it needs to map the needs of industry with the selected outputs from 
projects. Impact can also be enhanced by framing the outputs in the context of technological advances that 
are occurring in parallel to the SPIRE projects; hence SPRING will also review techniques used within projects 
for ‘technology scanning’, aiming to incorporate outputs also within the thematic workshop format.  
D – Guidance for Understanding Barriers to Uptake: Linked to Output C, SPRING will explore both generic and 
specific Case Study barriers that have limited industrial uptake of project outputs. This work will lead to the 
development of guidance to assist current and future SPIRE projects. Specific focus will be put on the 
challenges facing SME’s through the formation of an SME Working Group.  
E – Upskilled Project Participants: Project SPRING will form network groups, helping gather input from projects 
and providing a route to SPRING project dissemination. The use of such network groups should also ensure 
that SPRING training materials are seen as collaborative sharing of best practice, rather than one project 
instructing other experienced project participants how to perform their tasks. The training packages will be 
developed to meet gaps in open access training relevant to SPIRE projects. Topics that may be addressed 
include Business Opportunity Planning (using Lean Model Canvas4 and other tools); Communicating Impact; 
Integrating Sustainability into Project Management etc. Where relevant,  
SPRING will also incorporate or reference existing EC advice to project participants (e.g. Executive 
Agency for SMEs – Project Communication Advice 
https://ec.europa.eu/easme/en/communicationtoolkit).  
  
 
1.3.3 – LINKS TO OTHER INNOVATION ACTIVITIES  
This SPIRE-11 call requires a collaborative approach, cutting across sectors and industries. The SPRING project 
will therefore call upon, and feed into, several past, current and future initiatives across Europe funded either 
by European FP 6&7 programmes, H2020, directly by industry or industry bodies. It is anticipated that a 
definitive list of related activities will be drawn up as part of the project inception, but examples of known 
activities that will be particularly relevant are:  
SusChem Educate to Innovate – Britest was a partner in this SusChem programme which sought to 
exploit innovation outputs from SusChem’s Research and Innovation projects in order to enhance the 
innovation skills of future generations of scientists and engineers through the effective engagement of 
industry and higher education institutions5. Learning will be taken from this programme to help direct 
the development of a structure to capture SPIRE projects’ educational and training resources. An 
example of the learning is the feedback from academic workshops that were held in Educate to 
                                                           
3 SPIRE AGM, Brussels, November 2016  
4 https://leanstack.com/businessmodelcanvas/   
5 http://www.suschem.org/documents/document/20120420111017-educate_to_innovate_final_web.pdf   
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3246540 - 28/06/2017 
    
767412 -  SPRING – PART B      Page 17  
Innovate, which showed that it wasn’t feasible to develop material that would fit directly into all 
chemistry/ chemical engineering courses, given the different course structures used in academic 
institutions across the EU; however, material could be formatted in certain ways to make it more 
useful for those in academic institutions to incorporate into their courses as well as Life Long Learning 
programmes.   
 
Factories of the Future Enhancing Impact CSA’s – The FoF-07-2014 call, Support for the enhancement 
of the impact of FoF PPP Projects led to the funding of five projects. One of these projects was 
‘FoFImpact’, in which CRIT was a partner. Consequently, SPRING will take the learning from this 
project, along with the other FoF CSA’s to ensure that SPRING is starting from a higher foundation for 
awareness of best practice for impact enhancement within H2020 projects. Examples of learning from 
FoF-Impact are:  
o The need to address advice and exploitation-enhancing activities to all phases of a project 
lifecycle, from proposal writing through project implementation, and to after the funded action 
has ended.  
o The tendency of project partners to pursue exploitation activities individually rather than at 
consortium level, due to the different business models present within a consortium, and to the 
possible issues related to sharing revenues from project results.  
o The fact that projects funded under PPPs such as SPIRE and FoF are normally already 
industrydriven, thus having quite clear exploitation pathways. This results in possible conflicts 
when expanding exploitation investment beyond what has been already planned (e.g. starting 
a new company to commercialise results that a large industrial group would prefer to keep for 
themselves)  
SPIRE-12-2017 Call Projects – Projects that will address standardization needs and ways to overcome 
regulatory bottlenecks in the process industry.  
  
SPIRE projects represented by the SPRING consortium, which will be used as Case Studies for the testing of best 
practice, frameworks and guidance:  
  
Figure  
2 
  
– 
  
Educate to Innovate Methodology 
  

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3246540 - 28/06/2017 
    
767412 -  SPRING – PART B      Page 18  
ProPAT – Robust and affordable process control technologies for improving standards and optimising 
industrial operations. The ProPAT project funded through the SPIRE-01-2014 - Integrated Process 
Control call, which is being coordinated by IRIS, aims to develop robust and affordable process control 
technologies for improving standards and optimising industrial operations. Over the course of the four 
years of this project, state-of-the art sensors and analysers that can improve the control and efficiency 
of the process industry will be tested, optimised and integrated in a centralised Global System Control 
Platform and validated in processing applications to demonstrate the feasibility of ProPAT as an 
integrated process control solution for future wide European deployment in the process industry. The 
R&D effort will centre on engineering design, software/algorithm design, data analytics and data 
management, process engineering and industrial integration and validation.  
Sharebox – Secure Management Platform for Shared Process Resources. The Sharebox project was 
funded in SPIRE-06-2015 - Energy and resource management systems for improved efficiency in the 
process industries. Coordinated by IRIS, this project aims to pave the way forward for industrial 
symbiosis as a “solution for more efficient processing and energy systems for the process industry”. 
The SHAREBOX project is developing a secure software platform for the flexible management of shared 
process resources that will provide plant operations and production managers with the robust and 
reliable information that they need in real-time in order to effectively and confidently share resources 
(plant, energy, water, residues, and recycled materials) with other companies in an optimum symbiotic 
eco-system.  
IbD - Intensified-by-Design (IbD®). The IbD project, led by IRIS, was funded in SPIRE-08-2015 - Solids 
handling for intensified process technology. Following an innovative intensified-by-design® (IbD) 
approach, this Innovation Action project is developing a holistic software platform for facilitating 
process intensification design and optimisation in processes in which solids are an intrinsic part. 
Through six IbD®- enabled industrial process intensification case studies, the project will also develop 
and upgrade process intensification (PI) methods for the handling of solids in continuous production 
units based, on the one hand, on the intensification of currently existing PI processes and, on the other 
hand, through completely new PI approaches to the processing of solids.  
EPOS (H2020 SPIRE-06-2015): Enhanced energy & resource Efficiency and Performance in process 
industry Operations via onsite and cross-sectorial Symbiosis. This project, coordinated by UGent with 
INEOS as partner, brings together 5 global process industries from 5 key relevant sectors: steel, 
cement, chemicals, minerals and engineering. EPOS's main objective is to enable cross-sectorial 
Industrial Symbiosis (IS) and provide a wide range of technological and organisational options for 
making business and operations more efficient, more cost-effective, more competitive and more 
sustainable across process sectors. www.spire2030.eu/epos  
COPRO (H2020 SPIRE-02-2016): Improved energy and resource efficiency by better coordination of 
production in the process industries (just started) – INEOS partner. CoPro will provide tools for the 
plant-wide optimisation of continuous and discrete decisions, will develop technology for balancing 
production and consumption in industrial parks for industrial symbiosis and will address power plant 
scheduling and demand side response. www.spire2030.eu/CoPro   
STYLE (H2020 SPIRE-04-2014): Sustainability Toolkit for easY Life-cycle Evaluation. This project, 
coordinated by BRITEST, was a 2-year CSA bringing together industry partners from across the SPIRE 
sectors to identify, evaluate and propose a suitable collection of sustainability evaluation tools to meet 
the needs of industry project teams. Included in STYLE’s recommendations were ways in which 
sustainability assessment could be integrated into the early-stages of SPIRE projects, rather than 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3246540 - 28/06/2017 
    
767412 -  SPRING – PART B      Page 19  
focusing on detailed quantitative assessments towards the end of funded projects. STYLE also worked 
closely with the SAMT and MEASURE projects to develop joint recommendations, and hence can bring 
learning from these projects to SPRING too. www.spire2030.eu/style   
DREAM – Design for Resource and Energy efficiency in cerAMic kilns. Funded under the SPIRE-04-2016 
call, this project is led by SACMI, world leader in ceramics manufacturing equipment design and 
production, and has CRIT as dissemination and exploitation leader. Despite being fully targeted to 
ceramics technologies (and thus missing the trans-sectorial aspect of several SPIRE funded actions), the 
project contains also a dedicated market replication task, aiming to explore and pursue exploitation 
pathways in other process industries for selected key results. Thus, DREAM will provide a test bench for 
systematic trans-sectorial technology transfer, starting from a focused research activity. 
www.spire2030.eu/dream   
 
1.3.4 – COORDINATION AND MANAGEMENT  
Coordination and management of the project will be supplied by Britest. The organisation has, since its 
foundation in 2001, led collaborative projects and activities amongst its members, and has developed 
capabilities in the design and delivery of complex inter-disciplinary projects at the pre-competitive level.  
Britest’s membership includes a wide range of international industrial organisations both large and small 
(including Pfizer, AstraZeneca, Johnson Matthey, Fujifilm, Biogen, Victrex, Hovione, Stirling); international 
research and academic organisations (including ICES, Leeds, Nottingham and Limerick Universities). Through 
working with these organisations Britest has developed a distinctive knowledge and understanding for driving 
effective collaboration across industries and academic sectors. Britest brings this experience to project SPRING 
and will involve its member organisations as part of the wider stakeholder engagement activities.  
Britest also has direct experience of CSA project coordination through the SPIRE-04-2014 project, STYLE.   
A compact management structure for project SPRING has been chosen to reflect the fact that this is a CSA call 
with a limited number of core project partners, but with a larger stakeholder community interface. The 
management structure therefore consists of a General Assembly (GA), Industry Advisory Board (IAB) and a 
Stakeholder Forum (SF) – see section 3.4.  
 
1.3.5 – GENDER  
  
We envisage an excellent opportunity to explore the influence or not of gender aspects in impact delivery in 
RIA and IA collaborative projects. As such we will analyse the female participation in the existing SPIRE projects 
that have been funded to date and the different levels of involvement of females in the consortia (project 
management roles and other leadership roles, research, IPR, communication, dissemination, etc.), in addition 
to engagement with female stakeholders (industry leaders, etc.). We will also review the level of gender 
analysis activities being undertaken in this project at the implementation stage. Our aim will be to establish 
whether or not gender has an influence on certain aspects of success or not. With an increasing representation 
of females in leadership and decision making roles in the Process Industries, the ability to effectively address 
gender analyses in a meaningful way could have an influence on the ability to communicate and deliver impact.    
  
Moreover, the SPRING consortium has a very good gender balance (45% of participants are female) and 
females occupy a number of key leadership roles in the consortium: Project Coordinator, Industry Advisory  
Board Chair, WP and task leaders.    
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3246540 - 28/06/2017 
    
767412 -  SPRING – PART B      Page 20  
  
2.  IMPACT
2.1  EXPECTED IMPACTS   
 
2.1.1 – CONTRIBUTION TO THE EXPECTED IMPACTS  
Project SPRING will contribute to the expected impacts of the work programme in the following ways:  
 Speeding up industrial exploitation and take up of results of SPIRE PPP projects and facilitate cross -sectorial 
technology transfer.  
Project SPRING will speed up industrial exploitation by developing guidance for SPIRE project participants 
on the classification of exploitable project outcomes, which together with an improved structure for 
capturing and communicating these on the spire2030.eu web portal, will enable decision makers from 
industry to more quickly and clearly identify outputs of potential benefit. Thematic workshops will bring 
together common threads from across the portfolio of SPIRE projects to facilitate cross-sectorial learning 
and technology transfer; specifically, with a trial targeted at finding outputs of relevance to the ceramics 
industry.   
 Stimulation of networks and alliances for further RTD and industrial innovation in the addressed technology 
and application areas.  
Project SPRING will facilitate the development of new alliances and networks through the establishment of 
new SPIRE-level Network Groups (Coordinators, Sustainability Practitioners and SMEs) and through the 
thematic workshops, which aim to bring together projects from different funding calls but with common 
themes.  
 Added value beyond the original scope of the SPIRE PPP projects by exploiting synergies and sharing best 
practice, including on innovative business models. Increased public presence and awareness of SPIRE PPP 
activities.  
Project SPRING will bring added value to projects through the development and publication of best practice 
guidance (on metrics, communicating impact, addressing industry hurdles etc.) and providing mechanisms 
for exploiting synergies between projects (e.g. the Coordinator Network Group). Awareness will be 
increased through improvements to the spire2030.eu web portal, making it easier for stakeholders to find 
outputs of interest, and through the thematic workshops and associated publicity.  
 More effective execution of activities of common interest, such as training & education, IPR management and 
standardisation.  
Project SPRING will make it easier for projects to collaborate on areas of common interest, such as IPR 
management, data management and standardisation, through the SPIRE Coordinators Network Group. 
Improvements to the spire2030.eu web portal will enable project output material suitable for education 
and training to be structured and searchable for academia, industry and training providers. The guidelines 
developed in Project SPRING will support SPIRE project participants in developing education, training and 
other material related to exploitation and impact in a common format.  
 Anticipation of business trends and market prospects. Early awareness of key innovation developments.  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3246540 - 28/06/2017 
    
767412 -  SPRING – PART B      Page 21  
Project SPRING will review best practice for technology scanning and business trends, and test on case 
study projects, culminating in thematic workshops which will inform stakeholders of project outputs 
alongside innovation developments external to SPIRE. The learning from this will be incorporated into the 
guidance for SPIRE project participants to enable them to conduct similar horizon scanning activities.  
 Dissemination of project results beyond traditional dissemination models and timeframe of the projects.  
Project SPRING will develop a framework for structuring project outputs for educational and training 
purposes on the spire2030.eu portal beyond the standard timeframe of the projects. This will build on the 
work of Educate to Innovate, which trialled approaches with the FP7 project ‘F3 Factory’. The thematic 
workshop structure will also place a priority on best practice to engage with industry decision makers, 
methods for interaction and stepping away from ‘project seminar’ approaches. Social channels, such as 
LinkedIn groups, will also be utilised within SPRING to provide dissemination and input channels to 
stakeholder communities.  
 Development of training and innovation skills capacity in the process industry.  
Project SPRING will develop guidance and frameworks that will enable training material from SPIRE projects 
to be more readily accessible through the spire2030.eu website. In addition, it will produce its own set of 
training resources to upskill those involved in SPIRE projects to enhance impact within and beyond the 
timescales of their project (e.g. Communicating Impact, Integrating Sustainability into Project 
Management, Business Opportunity Planning etc.)  
  
  
 
2.1.2 – BARRIERS AND FRAMEWORK CONDITIONS  
Project SPRING is directly addressing barriers to industry uptake of project outputs. SPRING will provide a 
structured means to facilitate ease of access to a broad portfolio of SPIRE project outcomes. Ultimately, the 
biggest barrier is industry wanting to help itself, i.e.  
• Willingness of SPIRE project partners to apply the guidelines developed in SPRING to develop 
materials for enhanced impact  
• Willingness of SPIRE project partners to undertake SPRING training  
• Willingness of SPIRE project partners and the broader SPIRE process industry community to 
participate in Network Groups  
By incorporating into the project an open Stakeholder Forum and Industry Advisory Board, SPRING consortium 
partners will be made aware, at inception and throughout the project, of many of the issues, concerns and 
uncertainties which could impair effective roll-out of the findings. The consortium will therefore be able to take 
appropriate action at an early stage to lower the identified barrier. The inclusion of A.SPIRE as a project partner 
also helps to ensure that the outputs of SPRING are complementary to the advice being given and requests for 
information and participation already being directed at SPIRE projects.
2.2   MEASURES TO MAXIMISE IMPACT  
 
2.2.1. DISSEMINATION AND EXPLOITATION OF RESULTS   
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3246540 - 28/06/2017 
    
767412 -  SPRING – PART B      Page 22  
  
An important element of SPRING is ensuring that its impacts will endure beyond the timescale of the project, 
for many years to come.   
  
A dedicated project website will be the principal means by which stakeholder engagement is encouraged and 
supported throughout the project and from which the key project outputs will be disseminated and exploited.  
The project website will be hosted though www.spire2030.eu to provide consistency with existing projects and 
to ensure maintenance and accessibility once the project has completed.  
  
The SPIRE portal (www.spire2030.eu) has recently been upgraded to allow provision for interaction and 
communication between SPIRE stakeholders. Project SPRING will enable A.SPIRE to develop features and 
functionalities of the website portal consistent with best practice and to focus efforts on to elements that bring 
added value for the SPIRE community. For example, some networking groups may be better hosted through 
LinkedIn, to minimise the number of platforms that stakeholders use on a regular basis and to encourage 
broader participation beyond those already engaged in SPIRE activities; whereas, closer active collaboration 
between live SPIRE projects may be better done through the SPIRE portal to help manage confidential 
information and to link to other features of the portal, e.g. event calendars.   
  
To encourage broad participation at stakeholder and industry advisory board workshops and meetings, 
provision has been made in the project budget to fund reimbursement of travel costs for non-consortium 
attendees, including SME’s. A policy for this will be established by the project consortium at the start of the 
project.  
  
Opportunities for remote participation of stakeholders via survey, website discussion forums, webinars etc., 
will also be established to ensure all potential stakeholder groups/ individuals can both contribute to – and 
benefit from – results emerging from the project. Non-traditional dissemination channels through videos, blogs 
and social media will be utilised to make project information and outputs as engaging as possible.  
  
The consortium will also seek opportunities for preparation of papers suitable for publication, as well as for 
case studies, to raise awareness and promote uptake of enhanced project impact guidelines.   
    
Table 3 – SPRING Primary Exploitable Results   
Exploitable Results  Measure  Owners  
Guidance on how to measure progress/ 
impact/ success of projects  
Best Practice Manual (report)  Open Access  
High level framework for getting targeted 
awareness of SPIRE projects’ outputs  
Interactive website feature; 
Promotional video targeted at 
industry  
A.SPIRE; Open Access  
Framework for extracting training/ 
teaching resources from SPIRE projects  
Interactive website feature; 
Promotional video targeted at 
academics  
A.SPIRE; Open Access  
Model for mapping project outputs against 
industry needs  
Thematic workshops; report  Open Access  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3246540 - 28/06/2017 
    
767412 -  SPRING – PART B      Page 23  
Guidance for understanding business 
barriers to uptake  
Best Practice Manual  Open Access  
Training workshop and presentation 
package for communicating value and 
impact  
Training Package available as a 
SPIRE resource  
A.SPIRE; Open Access  
SPIRE SME Working Group  Member list  A.SPIRE  
SPIRE Coordinators Network Group  Member list  A.SPIRE  
SPIRE Sustainability Practitioners Working 
Group  
Member list  A.SPIRE  
Strategies for addressing policy gaps and 
future SPIRE needs  
Report  Open Access  
  
The SPRING exploitable outputs also have the potential to contribute more broadly to the wider Horizon2020 
objectives of driving economic growth, creating jobs and removing barriers to innovation to make it easier for 
the public and private sectors to work together in delivering innovation.  To this end, not only will SPRING 
outputs be thoroughly trialled within the 2-year timeframe of the project but steps will also be taken to 
encourage their exploitation beyond the timeframe of SPRING for all future SPIRE projects and further, where 
applicable, to other H2020/ FP9 future projects.  
  
Realisation of the full impact of project SPRING will still be dependent on the willingness of SPIRE stakeholders 
to use the guidance, training, website frameworks, etc. to enhance their own projects. However, A.SPIRE will 
continue to play an important role in the exploitation of SPRING results once the project has completed, taking 
ownership of the resources to help SPIRE projects, ensuring longevity of SPRING’s legacy.   
  
Data Management  
The majority of the data collected through SPRING will relate to the outputs from other SPIRE projects. SPRING 
will be working to ensure that relevant data from projects will be preserved through the spire2030.eu portal.   
The SPRING project will participate in the Open Research Data Pilot initiative. Effective exploitation of data 
depends upon proper data management and curation and as such as Data Management Plan will be drawn up 
and managed through Task 1.3: Data and Knowledge Management. A formal data plan will be drawn up and 
implemented during the project that will include: which data will be generated during the research; metadata, 
standards and quality assurance measures; plans for sharing data; copyright and intellectual property rights of 
data; data storage and back-up measures; data management roles and responsibilities; costing or resources 
needed. Indeed, data management will be embedded in the wider knowledge management of the project, and 
it will follow the Guidelines on Open Access to Scientific Publications and Research data in Horizon H2020. The 
ethical standard and guidelines of Horizon2020 will be rigorously applied, regardless of the country in which 
the research is carried out.  
  
Knowledge Management and Protection  
As a CSA, most of the knowledge generated within SPRING will be in an Open Access format to ensure 
maximum benefit to the broad SPIRE community. SPRING will work with individual SPIRE case study projects to 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3246540 - 28/06/2017 
    
767412 -  SPRING – PART B      Page 24  
establish which outputs are available for open dissemination. However, that said, through Task 1.3: Data and 
Knowledge Management, under the leadership of the Project Coordinator, SPRING will implement a strategy 
for knowledge management in order to ensure that no confidential or restricted output material from test/case 
study projects is put into the public domain, but will look for opportunities to translate and genericise outputs 
to make them suitable for wider dissemination and exploitation.   
In relation to IPR rules, we will follow the Horizon 2020 default rules from the model grant agreement.    
As such, in relation to background IPR and access rights, whereby ‘Background’ means any data, know-how or 
information-whatever its form or nature (tangible or intangible), including any rights such as intellectual 
property rights –that is a) held by the beneficiaries before they acceded to the Agreement, and b) needed to 
implement the action or exploit the results relation to access rights to Background, the consortium will comply 
with the H2020 default rules, whereby on the one hand, the partners/beneficiaries will provide each other 
access — on a royalty-free basis — to Background needed to implement their own tasks under the 
action/project. On the other hand, the partners will give each other access — under fair and reasonable 
conditions — to background needed for exploiting their own results. The consortium will declare an up to date 
status of Background before the Grant Agreement (GA) is signed, and at proposal stage it has been confirmed 
that all partners have the access they need to each other’s background.  
Results definition, protection, ownership and access rights: ‘Results’ means any (tangible or intangible) output 
of the action such as data, knowledge or information — whatever its form or nature, whether it can be 
protected or not — that is generated in the action/project, as well as any rights attached to it, including 
intellectual property rights. As discussed previously, the Results being outputted from the project will be put 
into the public domain ensuring that no confidential information from the project is revealed. To this end, to 
ensure that the Results do not trespass into the owned knowledge space of a third party, an internal 
agreement to the produced outputs will be sought upon the participating entities. In case results that can be 
exploitable (methodologies, strategies) appear during the course of the project, those results shall be owned 
by the participant generating them. To avoid doubt or confusion over ownership, a protocol of procedures will 
be defined that each partner will follow to clearly show the development of the generation of knowledge or 
Results. In cases where a Result is generated jointly (i.e. where the separate parts of some result cannot be 
attributed to different participants), it will be jointly owned, with the allocation and the terms of exercising this 
joint ownership to be included in a Joint Ownership Agreement that will be drawn up.  
Open access to peer-reviewed publications: Funding is available through Leeds University Business School to 
cover required open access article processing charges.  Additionally, the University of Leeds is a partner in the 
White Rose repository, which is categorised as a green standard repository with respect to open access.  
 
2.2.2. COMMUNICATION ACTIVITIES  
In recognition of the SPRING project structure, whereby the SPRING outputs are being generated to help direct 
the existing activities of A.SPIRE, communication activities will be managed between WP1 (Coordination and 
Management), WP4 (Output Generation) and WP5 (Stakeholder Engagement). BRITEST will manage 
intraconsortium communication within WP1 tasks and provide the link to their leadership of WP4, where 
outputs and publicity material will be generated for external communication. WP5, led by A.SPIRE, will act as 
the route to gather input from stakeholders and be the outlet for dissemination and exploitation of the outputs 
and publicity.   
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3246540 - 28/06/2017 
    
767412 -  SPRING – PART B      Page 25  
 
The programme of communication activities will ensure that the project objectives, progress and outputs are 
disseminated openly and professionally to a broad stakeholder community from project inception and 
throughout the project to ensure lasting impact beyond its completion.  
Intra-consortium information and communication sharing  
A secure project ‘portal’ will be established by BRITEST to facilitate the effective communication and 
distribution of information, reporting and data storage to and amongst project partners. This will act as the 
principal repository for project documentation and provide a platform for work package leaders to 
communicate and coordinate information. It will also be used to facilitate dialogue amongst researchers and 
case study project partners in the project and information exchange across work packages.   
External information and communication sharing  
An open access project website will be established through spire2030.eu to raise awareness of the project and 
facilitate the professional and effective communication of project objectives, progress and outputs. The 
website will be the principal means by which non-confidential project information is communicated externally 
and for which stakeholder engagement is promoted and maintained. Additional dissemination of project 
deliverables will be done via symposia, workshops and conferences where applicable.  
A.SPIRE, as WP5 leaders, will use their existing communication channels with the SPIRE community to aid 
engagement with stakeholders and dissemination of project outputs. This includes the SPIRE newsletter, PPP 
information days, SPIRE project workshops, partnering events and General Assembly meetings.   
In addition to the project website and SPIRE channels, dissemination will be actively sought via stakeholders 
and European/ National Technology Platforms, e.g. SusChem using their respective website, social and other 
communication media.   
Communication links with other Horizon 2020 Projects  
A.SPIRE will act as the main channel to other European FP7 and Horizon 2020 projects where there are 
opportunities for exchange of knowledge and approaches. CRIT will act as a link to H2020 Factories of the 
Future projects (through their ‘FoF-IMPACT’ project), bringing insight from a similar impact enhancement call in 
the FoF sectors. LEEDS will act as a link to broader European funded projects where impact enhancement 
methods have been evaluated.   
Table  
4 
  
– 
  
Project SPRING Communication Structure 
  
Figure  
3 
  
– 
  
Project SPRING Communication Structure 
  
WP1  
– 
  
Coordination  
and Management 
  
Intra 
- 
consortium  
communication 
  
External 
  
communication 
  
Generation of exploitable  
outputs and publicity  
materials 
  
Gath 
er i 
nput from  
stakeholders 
  
Dissemination  
and  
exploitation  
of outputs  
and publicity 
  
WP4  
– 
  
Output  
Generation 
  
WP5  
– 
  
Stakeholder  
Engagement 
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3246540 - 28/06/2017 
    
767412 -  SPRING – PART B      Page 26  
Comprehensive communication activities will ensure that we effectively promote our project and its outputs, as 
well as its benefits and impacts to the stakeholders that we want to reach and secure engagement with. At this 
stage, we have mapped out a preliminary plan of the communication activities (Table 2.2.2 – Outline Plan of the 
SPRING Communication Activities) that will be performed for promoting the project and its findings during the 
period of the grant, based on a process of analysing: Why – the purpose of the communication action; What 
will be communicated – the message; To whom – the audience; How – the method; When – the timing. As part 
of the workplan and our communication structure, we will build on, implement and report on this plan.   
     
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3246540 - 28/06/2017 
    
767412 -  SPRING – PART B      Page 27  
Table 2.2.2 – Outline Plan of the SPRING Communication Activities  
How (Method)  
Why  
(Purpose)  
To whom  
(Audience)  What (Message)  When  Metrics  
Project Website   Awareness  
Inform  
Engage  
Promote  
SPIRE projects; 
Other Relevant 
H2020 Projects; A.  
SPIRE members;  
Wider Process  
Industries; Other 
PPP, Associations 
and Multipliers; 
Policy makers.  
General project information, objectives, 
impacts, consortium, access to public 
deliverables and outputs, project news 
and events, engagement information  
First version launched by M2. 
Ongoing updating and throughout 
the project   
Checking 
usage logs & 
no. of project 
consultations  
Video/web viral  Awareness  
Inform  
Promote  
Project results, impact for SPIRE, 
benefits for industry, academics, 
environment, public  
Expected by M23 (final date will be 
agreed during the project). 
Available from website & other 
digital platforms  
No. of 
viewings  
     
Newsletters  Awareness   Project progress and updates, Industry 
testimonials and interviews, Upcoming 
Events, etc.   
Every 6 months (disseminated 
through SPIRE, partners’ contacts; 
downloadable from web, etc.)   
No. of 
consultations  
Press Releases   Awareness  General public  Public interest content about the 
impacts of the project for sustainability, 
competitiveness, growth, jobs, benefits 
of EU funded R&D.  
At KO, and in line with public 
interest developments in the 
project, events, etc.  
No. of hits on 
web  
Project Blog  Awareness  
Inform  
Engage  
All External 
Stakeholders  
Posts about developments, updates, 
observations, conclusions  
At least one post per quarter 
(members of the consortium team 
will write different blog articles)  
Readership & 
No. of 
consultations  
Programme and 
Network 
meetings   
Engage  SPIRE and other  
H2020/National 
Projects; EC 
stakeholders; 
Policy; Industry 
networks.  
Best Practice in Impact Enhancement in  
Research and Innovation Actions and  
Innovation actions  
At least 3 over course of project: 
e.g. Meetings of A.SPIRE;  
Commission Impact Workshops 
etc.   
No. of 
engagements  
Conference  
Posters &  
Presentations  
Engage  
Promote  
Research 
community  
Project methodology, results and 
conclusions. Note: presentations will 
also be disseminated on Slideshare that 
has an average of 60 million unique 
visitors per month.   
e.g. Industrial Technologies 
(Biannual EU Conference on 
industrial R&D), Tecnargilla 
(Biannual fair on ceramics 
technologies), ACHEMA etc.  
No. of 
engagements 
and No. of 
hits on web  
Peer reviewed 
papers  
Inform  e.g. International Journal of  
Innovation Management, Journal 
of Innovation & Knowledge etc.  
No. of 
citations  
Articles in  
Magazines  
Inform  SPIRE projects; 
Other Relevant 
H2020 Projects; A.  
SPIRE members;  
Wider Process  
Industries; Other 
PPP, Associations 
and Multipliers; 
Policy makers.  
  
  
Best Practice in Impact Enhancement in  
Research and Innovation Actions and 
Innovation actions. Knowledge/Lessons 
learned in the project.   
  
  
e.g. Research*eu, sector specific 
publications, SusChem online 
articles etc.   
No. hits on 
web and 
consultations  
Workshop and  
Training sessions  
Engage 
Inform  
At least 3 over course of the 
project to coincide with key 
outputs and milestones  
No. of 
attendees & 
No. of 
engagements  
Case studies/  
Insight  
Summaries  
Inform  Snapshot of project findings, with 
reference to case studies.  
Coincide with guidance 
development  
No. web 
downloads & 
consultations  
Social Media/  
Digital campaign  
Awareness  
Inform  
Engage  
Promote  
Tailored digital campaigns in social 
media channels using infographics, 
storytelling, cast studies, etc. to 
communicate vision, ambition, benefits 
and impacts of our project, etc.  
A series of campaigns will be 
scheduled to coincide with key 
milestones, activities and events  
No. of likes, 
comments, 
etc.  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3246540 - 28/06/2017 
    
767412 -  SPRING – PART B      Page 28  
Reports and 
other project 
documents  
Inform  Available to all 
external 
stakeholders  
Public deliverables (from the 
deliverables list)  
Upon completion, according to the 
deliverables list  
No. web 
downloads & 
consultations  
  
3.  IMPLEMENTATION
3.1  WORK PLAN – WORK PACKAGES AND DELIVERABLES  
The table below summarises the work packages defined by the Project SPRING consortium. In overview only, 
the packages are:  
WP1 – 
Coordination 
and  
Management  
Covering management of the project, its activities, its resources, its 
internal communications and its links to the Commission  
BRITEST lead  
WP2 -  
Research  
Gathering knowledge from partners within the consortium, the SPIRE 
and FoF projects that they represent, stakeholders in the SPIRE 
community and broader project and policy research to propose best 
practice methods  
LEEDS lead  
WP3 – Testing 
and Validation  
Testing recommended methods and guidance on case study SPIRE 
projects  
IRIS lead  
WP4 – Output  
Generation  Developing the exploitable outputs for SPRING. These include guidance 
for current and future SPIRE projects, frameworks for the spire2030.eu 
website and training  
BRITEST lead  
WP5 –  
Stakeholder  
Engagement  
Stimulating broad engagement throughout the project, providing a 
route to gather input from the broader SPIRE community and for 
outputs from the project to get back to the stakeholders  
ASPIRE lead  
  
The structure for SPRING is a matrix of Work Packages, through which the project outputs are produced:   
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3246540 - 28/06/2017 
    
767412 -  SPRING – PART B      Page 29  
 
  
Table  
5 
  
- 
  
Work Package Structure (& lead partner) 
  
WP1  
– 
  
Coordination and Management (BRITEST) 
  
WP2  
– 
  
Research 
  
) 
LEEDS 
( 
   
WP3  
– 
  
Testing & Validation (IRIS) 
  
WP4  
– 
  
Output Generat 
ion 
  
( 
 ) 
BRITEST 
  
WP5  
– 
  
Stakeholder Engagement (A.SPIRE) 
  
 
 
PROJECT SPRING – HIGH LEVEL TIMELINE – YEAR 1  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3246540 - 28/06/2017 
 
 
  
767412 -  SPRING – PART B      Page 28  
  
  
   
 
 
  
  
PROJECT SPRING  
 – 
  
HIG 
H LEVEL TIMELINE  
 – 
  
Y 
EAR 2 
  
  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3246540 - 28/06/2017 
 
 
767412 -  SPRING – PART B      Page 29  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3246540 - 28/06/2017 
    
767412 -  SPRING – PART B      Page 34
3.2  MANAGEMENT STRUCTURE AND PROCEDURES   
Project SPRING’s management structure will be a General Assembly (GA), Industry Advisory Board (IAB) and 
Stakeholder Forum (SF).  
It is anticipated that the General Assembly and Industry Advisory Board will meet at the inception of the project 
and at six monthly intervals thereafter. IAB meetings may also be timed to coincide with general SPIRE 
meetings, to ensure high attendance and efficient use of industrialist’s time.  
A compact management structure for project SPRING has been chosen to reflect the fact that this is a CSA call 
with a limited number of core project partners but with a large stakeholder community interface.  
 
  
The General Assembly is the ultimate decision-making body of the Consortium. Each project partner (legal 
entity) appoints one representative to be a member of the GA. It is anticipated that the GA will be chaired by a 
senior employee of the organisation carrying out WP1 (BRITEST) – to be confirmed by a vote at the first 
meeting. The GA will be the key body for significant decisions concerning the whole project and for the 
strategic orientation of the project. Examples include changes to the consortium plan, decisions about the 
entry of a new party to the consortium, the declaration of a party as defaulting party, the withdrawal of a party 
from the consortium or the termination of the project. Under exceptional circumstances, preliminary decisions 
can be made via a remote meeting of the General Assembly members. The following operational principles are 
proposed for SPRING. At the project inception, these will be examined in detail, modified as necessary and 
ratified by the full General Assembly:  
- Each member has one vote  
- Where possible, General Assembly members will attempt to reach a conclusion by discussion and 
agreement. If agreement cannot be reached, all members will vote.   

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3246540 - 28/06/2017 
    
767412 -  SPRING – PART B      Page 35  
- Decisions will be reached by a simple majority, with the chair having a casting vote; major project 
changes will require the vote to be unanimous.  
- In the event of a dispute, those Consortium members who are not directly involved in the dispute will 
act as an Arbitration Panel to resolve the dispute.  
The Industry Advisory Board will consist of a minimum of three industry representatives from different SPIRE 
sectors, along with a representative from SPIRE’s IRIAG (Industry Research and Innovation Advisory Group) – 
Ignacio Martin, IRIAG Chair. The SPRING Industry Advisory Board will be chaired by Greet Van Eetvelde (INEOS) 
and will be tasked with ensuring that SPRING’s work is focused on the barriers to industrial uptake of project 
findings. The IAB will also be used to help broaden and strengthen links to other industry stakeholders. BRITEST 
will act as secretariat to the IAB.  
BRITEST, as Project Coordinator, will provide inputs to the Commission.  
Work Package Leaders (WPL) will be responsible for coordinating, monitoring and reporting of the Work 
Package. Tasks of the Work Package Leaders are the implementations of the Work Programme and the 
reporting on deliverables and milestones to the Project Coordinator.  
The Stakeholder Forum (SF) plays an important role in linking the SPRING project to organisations, individuals 
and activities beyond the project consortium. The Stakeholder Forum will act as a two-way communication 
channel to both gather the thoughts and experiences of the members, and to inform the wider stakeholder 
community as to the findings from SPRING project. The forum will be based as an online group, but specialist 
sub-groups will be assembled from the forum to tackle specific tasks in SPRING, e.g. academic course 
developers to consult on the framework for project outputs.   
Three specific specialist stakeholder groups will be established as part of SPRING that should continue beyond 
the timeframe of SPRING:  
- SPIRE Coordinators Network Group: This group should enable more cross-project collaborations and 
provide a route for gathering best practice and recommendations dissemination.  
- SPIRE Sustainability Practitioners Group: This group should help bring together those tasked with 
sustainability evaluations in SPIRE projects, aiding the uptake of SPIRE-04-2014 projects’ 
recommendations and encouraging best practice sharing and more consistent approaches to 
integrating sustainability into early project developments.  
- SPIRE SME Working Group: This group should help gather views from the SME members of SPIRE as to 
specific challenges for smaller organisations getting project outputs into industry.
3.3  CONSORTIUM AS A WHOLE   
BRITEST is ideally placed to coordinate this CSA. BRITEST started life as an Open Innovation collaboration, 
working with industry and academia on a pre-competitive basis, allowing it to build a role as a ‘trusted 
intermediary’. BRITEST is a not-for-profit organisation, with a core aim of empowering industry and academia 
to translate technical innovations and issues into clear structured knowledge that is understandable and 
accessible by cross-disciplinary teams. BRITEST strives to get project teams delivering better projects; not for 
them to need consultants on a regular basis.  
BRITEST represents its own consortium of members and associates from the process industries and academia 
(e.g. Pfizer, Johnson Matthey, FujiFilm, Astra Zeneca etc.), providing further opportunities to get industry input 
to SPRING. A large part of BRITEST’s work is coordinating projects between BRITEST members and with external 
consortia. Consequently, BRITEST see this project as an opportunity to raise the game, to understand and then 
develop best practice for getting collaborative project results back into industry, delivering real value.  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3246540 - 28/06/2017 
    
767412 -  SPRING – PART B      Page 36  
The SPRING consortium represents a broad selection of existing SPIRE projects (including STYLE, EPOS, IbD, 
ProPAT, SHAREBOX, and DREAM), keen to come together to look for further collaboration and exploitation 
opportunities.  
Large industry is represented through INEOS, BRITEST Members and the Industry Advisory Board; SMEs are 
represented through IRIS, CRIT and the SME Working Group; academia is represented through LEEDS and 
academic stakeholders. A.SPIRE provide a link to all other SPIRE PPP stakeholders.   
IRIS is a good example of a technology SME which is actively leading and implementing three SPIRE projects, in 
order to showcase the relevant role and opportunities that are open to SMEs within the SPIRE PPP. Technology  
SMEs often hold the Key Enabling Technologies (KETs) to resolve the challenges faced by the European Process 
Industries and can be very flexible and innovative allies to Large Enterprises in terms of technological 
innovations.  
CRIT and IRIS both have strong links to the ceramics sector, which has been one of the least represented 
sectors in SPIRE projects to date, hence SPRING will provide an opportunity to make a specific trial of 
identifying and/ or translating outputs from other SPIRE sectors relevant to ceramics.  
All partners are members of SPIRE, so have interests in helping the PPP achieve its Roadmap goals.  
The focus of the SPRING project is what is needed to get projects outputs adopted by industry. This is reflected 
in the industry-biased consortium. In addition, the Leeds University contribution is led by their Business School 
to keep the focus on business exploitation of project outputs.