2.3 Summary 
Specific Needs  Expected Results  D & E & C Measures  
• Current SAF supply is low at <0.05% of total EU 
aviation fuel use. To meet sustainability targets, 
SAF supply must be increased (~2.3 Million 
Tonnes by 2030, 28.6 MT by 2050).  
• SAFs are currently more expensive than fossil -
based jet fuel.  
• Algae biofuels are currently not sustainable and 
cost-competitive due to a range of factors:  
-  High biomass production cost (& limited 
feedstock availability) due to lack of access to 
cheap and abundant supply of nutrients.  
- Culture crash due to bacterial contamination 
-  High biorefinery cost due to high energy 
requirements associated with cell disruption 
and high solvent requirements.  
-  Low fuel conversion efficiency due to limited 
understanding of the thermochemical routes for 
conversion of biomass compone nts to SAFs 
and the required purification steps.  
A more sustainable, cost-competitive and efficient process 
for the production of algae SAFs via technologies that enable 
production of microalgae on cheap and abundant CO2 and 
waste nutrients from the AD sector: 
- Autotrophic growth strategy on digestate  
- Membrane system for CO2 delivery to microalgae culture  
- In-line sensor for bacterial detection/enumeration  
- UV irradiation system for bacterial control  
- Low-energy cell disruption based on autolysis  
- Lipid extraction strategy to minimise solvent usage 
- Multifunctional catalysts with H 2 looping route for 
conversion of algal lipids to HEFA-SPK 
- Algae-specific HEFA-SPK purification method 
- Route for the conversion of microalgae biomass residue to 
TCR-HDO oil (kerosene mixture) 
- Algae-specific TCR-HDO purification method  
- Pilot plant for full-system process (TRL4 /5) of converting 
digestate to microalgae-based aviation fuel  
- Process simulations, business- modelling, life -cycle 
analysis and policy assessment/recommendation. 
Dissemination measures:  20+ Industry Workshops, 
networking events, webinars, and seminars;  
Workshops at pilot-scale algae fuel facility on AD 
site; 10+ open-access publications; >12 presentations 
and >2 conference workshops; Microalgae Fuel 
Summer Research School; Technical brochures;  
Policy white paper; SusAlgaeFuel Final Conference. 
Exploitation measures:  
■ IP protection for new technologies followed by 
open-access publications and open-science repository 
according to Data Management Plan;  
■ BMCs and Business/commercialisation plans;  
■ Policy white paper;  
■ RSB certification  
Communication measures:  SusAlgaeFuel public 
website and social -media channels; Communication 
training programme; Promotional contents 
(infographics, leaftets, posters, project videos),  
Journalistic content (e.g. interviews, press release); 
Women-in-Science campaign. 
Target Groups   Outcomes  Impacts  
- AD operators as technology adopters  
- Algae producers as technology providers  
- Fuel/SAF producers  
- Aviation sector: Aircraft manufacturers; Leasing 
facilities; Airports & airlines 
- By-product users: Biofertiliser & feed producers  
- Sensor manufacturers  
- Fuel certification authorities  
- Industry associations 
- Academic community / researchers  
- EU projects in related area  
- Policymakers and MPs (national & EU^) 
- Investors in green technology 
- University students (undergraduate, master, PhD) 
- General public/air passengers 
- Further innovative/disruptive research in microalgae and 
SAF production on the basis of our findings, leading to IP 
generation, licenses, and spin-outs. 
- Commercialisation plan for post -project scale up  of 
SusAlgaeFuel process & adoption by SAF producers, AD 
operators & businesses along aviation fuel supply chain 
- Robust mechanisms and research to increase the scale and 
reduce the cost of algal biofuels to <35 €/MWh by 2030 
according to SET plan 8 mandate, in creasing the 
efficiency, and decreasing GHG emissions of  algae SAFs. 
- Positive policy changes  at national and EU levels in 
relation to SAF adoption, phasing out of fossil fuels and 
creating subsidies/incentives for SAF commercialization 
- Greater awareness of the importance of SAF amongst the 
general public, with an effective focus on air passengers 
- Scientific and technological: Groundbreaking 
innovative approaches that work in tandem to enable 
a more cost -
competitive, efficient, and circular 
production of microalgae SAFs, complemented with 
process simulations, techno- economic and LCA to 
assess scalability and identify process 
improvements.  
- Energy security in the EU and economic :  
Delivering world’s 1 st microalgae HEFA -SPK 
and TCR -HDO fuels  tested for compliance to 
ASTM jet -fuel specifications as microalgae 
substitute aviation fuel with potential to annually 
treat 172 Mt of digestate for the production of 1 Mt 
of HEFA -SPK (equivalent to 20% of Europe’s 
projected SAF requirements of 5 Mt in 2030). 
 
[HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-02-08] [Development of microalgae fuel production and purification technologies for advanced aviation fuels] 
30 
3 QUALITY AND EFFICIENCY OF IMPLEMENTATION #@QUA-LIT-QL@# #@WRK-PLA-WP@# 
3.1.Work Plan and Resources                                                                                                                        
SusAlgaeFuel is divided into eight interconnected WPs which work to complement each other in delivering an 
integrated technology, business model, sustainability and polic y solution for algal aviation fuel development in the 
EU. The interconnectivity between the WPs is illustrated in Figure 3.1a. WPs 1-4 will provide core technology 
development at bench scale, while WP5 will use the information obtained in these WPs to assess commercial and 
socio-environmental scalability of the system. Each WP is further divided into  several Tasks to address specific 
objectives. In WP6, the processes developed in WPs 1-4, complemented with process optimisation based on WP5, 
will be transferred to pilot scale to demonstrate scalability, culminating in the production of sufficient SAF for ASTM 
compliance test at the end project of lifetime. The project will adopt a staggered approach, with WP6 starting only in 
Month 25 (2nd phase of the project), allowing investigation in WPs 1-4 to reach sufficient maturity prior to scale-up. 
WP7 provides blueprint for results dissemination, commercialisation and policy guidance.  
Figure 3.1a: SusAlgaeFuel’s approach and interconnectivity between WPs  
Management Structure: The Executive Board (EB) assumes the overarching leadership for the project. It decides 
on the general policy and strategic orientations of the project to ensure that milestones and deliverables are achieved 
according to the timeline. EB is responsible for monitoring the overall progress of the project and designing corrective 
actions or authorising the execution of risk mitigation strategies when significant project delay/deviation is observed. 
The EB comprises all WP l eaders and the project coordinator. The experienced Project Coordinator (UCD,) has 
the overall responsibility to manage and execute the project. They also act as an intermediary between European 
Commission, Advisory Board (which currently consists of Boeing and CityJet), EB and rest of the consortium. WP 
Leaders are in charge of: (a) implementing decisions taken by the EB for their WPs , (b) coordinating the activities 
within their WPs and monitoring progress, (c) reporting to Project Coordinator, and (d) organizing and chairing 
online WP meetings. The Project Office (PO) at UCD will manage the daily logistics of coordination activities on 
behalf of Project Coordinator, including the organisation of on-site consortium meetings at M1, M18, M36 and M48   
Table 3.1a: List of Work Packages 
WP  
No. WP Title Lead 
Part.No 
Lead  
Partner  
Person-
Months 
Start 
Month 
End 
Month 
1 High-density cultivation through biogenic CO2 
capture and waste utilisation  
1 UCD 39.5 1 36 
2 Sensor system for bacterial detection and culture 
purification  
3 IRIS 42.0 1 36 
3 Cascading biorefinery for biomass purification  5 KIT 63.0 1 36 
4 High-efficiency fuel conversion and purification  6 UCAM 70.7 1 36 
5 Process integration and whole life-cycle analysis 8 SFS 38.0 13 48 
6 Pilot scale-up, fuel testing and digital twin 3 A4F 154.0 25 48 
7 Communication, policy and exploitation roadmap 9 ESCI 46.7 1 48 
8 Project coordination  1 UCD 29.7 1 48 

[HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-02-08] [Development of microalgae fuel production and purification technologies for advanced aviation fuels] 
31 Figure 3.1b: Gantt chart for SusAlgaeFuel
Milestones (ML) and 
Deliverables (D) M2 M4 M6 M8 M10 M12 M14 M16 M18 M20 M22 M24 M26 M28 M30 M32 M34 M36 M38 M40 M42 M44 M46 M48
ML1.1, D1.1 ML D
 D1.2 D
ML1.2 ML
D1.3 D
D.2.1 D
D2.2 D
D2.3 D
ML3.1, D3.1 ML D
ML3.2, D3.2 ML D
ML4.1, D4.1 ML D
ML4.2, D4.2 ML D
ML4.3, D4.3 ML D
ML4.4, D4.4 ML D
ML4.5, D4.5 ML D
ML5.1, D5.1 ML D
D5.2 ML D
ML6.1, ML6.2 ML ML
ML6.3, ML6.4,  D6.1, D6.2 ML D ML D
ML6.5, D6.3 ML D
 D6.4 D
 D7.1, D7.2, D7.3 D D D D
D7.4 D
D7.5, D7.6 D, D
D8.1 DT8.3: Data management and open science
Year 4Year 1 Year 2 Year 3
WP3: Cascading biorefinery for biomass purification 
T3.1: Autolytic cell-wall disruption for direct processing of wet microalgae 
T1.1: Digestate characterisation and pre-treatment
T1.4:  Hybrid cultivation integrating direct CO2 capture and digestate bioremediation
WP2: Sensor system for bacterial detection and culture purification 
T1.2: Development of cultivation procedures on digestate
T2.1: In-line sensor technology to monitor bacterial level 
T3.2: Solvent screening, recycling and emulsion management 
WP4: High-efficiency fuel conversion and purification 
T4.2: Chemical looping to reduce hydrogen and energy during HEFA-SPK synthesis
T1.3:  Novel membrane system for the delivery of biogenic CO2 to aqueous solution
WP1: High-density cultivation through biogenic CO2 capture and digestate utilisation
WP8: Project coordination 
T6.1: Design, build, and commission of a pilot-scale system comprised of cultivation and biorefinery 
units
T6.4: Digital twin of the pilot system 
T7.1: Communication, dissemination and exploitation strategy 
T7.5: Policy analysis 
WP7: Communication, policy and exploitation roadmap
WP5: Process integration and whole life-cycle analysis
T5.1: Techno-economic assessment and identification of major cost drivers
T5.2: Life-cycle analysis and identification of socio-environmental hotspots 
T4.5: Algal TCR-HDO fuel purification
T7.2: Communication activities
T2.2: UV irradiation for bacterial management
T8.2: Risk management and contingency planning
T6.2: Operation of pilot system for production of lipids and biomass residue 
T6.3:Pilot fuel production, purification and  testing for compliance with ASTM standards 
T8.1: Scientific, administrative and financial coordination
T2.3: Symbiotic algae/bacteria interaction and adaptive growth
WP6: Pilot scale-up, fuel testing and digital twin 
T7.3: Stakeholder engagement and networking
T7.4: Exploitation pathways and business-model development 
T4.3: Algal HEFA-SPK fuel purification
T4.4: TCR-HDO treatment for the conversion of microalgae residue to kerosene mixture
T4.1: Multifunctional catalyst for hydrotreatment conversion of microalgae lipids into HEFA-SPK
[HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-02-08] [Development of microalgae fuel production and purification technologies for advanced aviation fuels] 
32 
Table 3.1b: Work package description 
Work Package No.  1 Lead: UCD 
Work Package Title  High-density cultivation through biogenic CO2 capture and digestate utilisation 
Start Month 1 End Month 36 
Objectives:  To develop high-density microalgal cultivation strategies by capturing biogenic CO 2 and recovering 
waste nutrients from digestate. 
We will a) formulate a cultivation medium based on liquid fraction of digestate that minimises or overrides the need 
for artificial nutrients (Task 1.1), b) develop autotrophic cultivation strategies for the investigated oleaginous species 
(Task 1.2), c) develop a novel membrane system for the efficient delivery of CO 2 into microalgae culture, and d) 
integrate CO2 delivery system with cultivation strategies on digestate in a single system and optimise this hybrid 
system to attain biomass concentration > 3 g biomass/L and lipid content >30 wt% of biomass (Task 1.4). 
Description of work:  
In this WP, A4F  and UCD will work together to establish optimum cultivation strategies for each investigated 
species (C. pyrenoidosa, A. protothecoides, N. salina) at bench scale (2 – 10 L culture). Cultivation will utilise the 
liquid fraction of anaerobic digestate (supplied by partner BIAE) as N and P source and CO2 as carbon source. The 
characteristics and consistency  of the supplied digestate in terms of physical, biochemical and microbiological 
properties will first be analysed. The digestate will then be subjected to a range of pre-treatment steps (e.g. dilution, 
filtration) to generate liquid medium with dissolved nutrients configurations suitable for algal growth. Afterwards, 
the three species will be cultivated on the digestate-based medium under different growth parameters and the ability 
of each species in recovering nutrients will be analysed. For the CO 2 delivery system, UCD will develop a non-
porous membrane CO2 delivery (or carbonation) system and compare their performance to standard methods for 
delivering CO2 into microalgae culture (e.g. sparging). The membrane carbonation system will then be integrated 
with cultivation strategies on digestate medium and optimised for maximum CO 2 utilisation, biomass productivity 
and lipid accumulation. The results and technologies obtained in this WP will be used for techno-economic and LCA 
in WP5 and transferred to the pilot scale-up in WP6.   
Task 1.1:  Digestate characterisation and pre-treatment (M1 – 8). Lead: UCD. Participants: A4F . 
An initial characterisation of digestate supplied from BIAE will be carried out in terms of total N (by colorimetric 
methods), NH 4-N (by colorimetric methods), total P (by colorimetric methods), volatile fatty acid (VFA) 
concentrations (by GC), turbidity, micronutrient  concentrations (by ICP -AES), and total solid content. 
Microbiological contaminants (by plate count) and potential growth inhibitors, such as heavy metals (by ICP-AES), 
will be identified. The digestate will be partitioned into solid and liquid fractions via a series of pre-treatment steps 
that include settling and centrifugation. The liquid fraction isolated from centrifugation will be analysed through the 
same set of characterisations as above before being subjected to further pre -treatments using a combination of 
microfiltration, ultrafiltration ,or two-step filtration, in tangential flow configurations for removing solid particulates 
and bacteria and producing filtrate wi th accessible nutrients for microalgal growth. The filtrate will then undergo 
the same set of characterizations as raw digestate and isolated liquid digestate. The sequences of pre-treatment steps 
and parameters (e.g. transmembrane pressure for filtration)  will be optimised to achieve maximum nutrient 
extraction. This task will guide A4F in the formulation of cultivation medium from digestate, minimizing the use of 
artificial nutrients in Task 1.2. Different batches of digestate received from BIAE will be  analysed for their 
consistency in physical properties and chemical compositions and the effect of inter-batch variation on pre-treatment 
efficiency and filtrate composition.  
Task 1.2:  Development of cultivation procedures on digestate (M9 – 24). Lead: A4F. Participants: UCD.  
In this task, cultivation procedures will be implemented at lab scale for achieving high biomass concentration and 
lipid content on pre-treated liquid digestate obtained Task 1.1. A microalgae cultivation medium with the pre-treated 
liquid digestate will be formulated by including the digestate in standard medium at different dilution ratios (ranging 
from no dilutions to digestate:standard medium ratio = 1:8 v/v), testing the effects on the three microalgae species 
selected, using lab-scale controlled conditions. The effect of digestate concentration on microalgae growth rates and 
on lipid accumulation will be assessed and the best dilution for each species will be identified. Specifically, the 
potential influence of carboxylic acids present in the digestate on the lipid profile will be investigated using GC-MS 
analysis.
 The need for supplementing the growth medium with crucial microelements will also be assessed. The pre-
cultivation and post -harvest medium will be subjected to same set of biochemical characterization to assess the 
extent of nutrient utilisation by microalgae. The achieved medium formulation will be used for all strains growth 
and improvements on light, temperature, pH conditions will be performed to achieve maximum bioma ss 
concentration and lipid content. Final standard operation protocols (SOPs) will be prepared for the cultivation of the 
three species using the developed strategy. The best performing strain will be used in Task 1.4 and WP6. 
Task 1.3:  Novel membrane system for the delivery of biogenic CO2 to aqueous solution (M1 – 24). Lead: UCD. 
Participants: A4F. 
The membrane carbonation system for CO 2 delivery into aqueous solution will first be designed and operated at 
bench scale without the presence of microalgae. In order to achieve maximum CO2 transfer into aqueous solution, 
the performance of the system will be optimised in terms of membrane types, membrane configurations, CO2 partial 
pressure and pH of the solution. In terms of membrane configurations, we will first use a composite hollow -fibre 
membrane made of a nonporous polyurethane dense core as shown in Figure 1.2a but will explore other options as 
[HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-02-08] [Development of microalgae fuel production and purification technologies for advanced aviation fuels] 
33 
the Task progresses. The mass transfer of molecular CO2 across the membrane is dependent on intrinsic permeability 
of the membrane, the difference in CO 2 concentration between the supplied gas and the solution (as indicated by 
CO2 partial pressure), and solution pH7,55. The membrane system will be equipped with an automated pH controller 
to correct pH levels within optimal range throughout operation. The rate of CO 2 delivery into the solution will be 
determined by the difference between total carbon and total organic carbon in the solution (with a TOC analyser).  
Task 1.4: Hybrid cultivation integrating direct CO2 capture and digestate bioremediation (M19 – 36). Lead: 
UCD. Participants: A4F 
In this Task., we will combine the membrane carbonation system developed in Task 1.3 with the digestate 
bioremediation strategies investigated in Task 1.2 at bench scale. The Task is divided into two stages where we will 
first operate the membrane carbonation system in microalgae culture grown on standard medium before transferring 
into dual system with digestate.  
The membrane system is integrated into a 2L photobioreactor and its effectiveness in delivering CO2 to microalgae 
culture grown standard medium is evaluated using the best performing strain found in Task 1.2. The mass transfer 
of CO
2 in the integrated system is driven by a carbon -concentration gradient maintained through the continuous 
photosynthetic uptake of CO 2(aq) and HCO 3- by microalgal cells 7,55,56. The rate of photosynthesis, i n turn, is 
dependent on cultivation parameters, such as nutrient availability (N and P), light intensity, pH and growth 
phase9,57,58. The performance of the system will be measured in terms of biomass productivity and CUE, calculated 
as the ratio of carbon assimilated in the biomass (measured with CN analyser) to the amount of carbon delivered 
into the microalgae suspension (measured w ith a flow meter). In addition to carbon mass balance, nitrogen and 
phosphorus mass balances (by colorimetric methods and ICP-AES) will also be developed to understand the limiting 
factors in the system. Mass- transfer model to describe the kinetics of carb on transport across the membrane and 
subsequent carbon utilisation by microalgae will be developed and solved using MATLAB.  
Once fundamental mass transfer of the system is understood, the dual system will be operated using digestate 
medium derived from Ta sk 1.1 with dilution ratio found in Task 1.2, bringing together a full system where 
microalgae growth (optimum strain from Task 1.2) is supported using CO2 delivered by the membrane system and 
N, P and micronutrients supplied by the digestate. The performa nce of the system will be assessed in terms of 
biomass productivity, and bioremediation (or nutrient utilisation) of the digestate. The system parameters (e.g. light 
intensity, pH, growth phase and harvest time) will be optimised to maximise CUE (> 90%), f inal biomass 
concentration (> 3 g biomass / L) and biofuel-lipid accumulation (>30 wt% of biomass), while achieving complete 
bioremediation. The neutral lipid content and fatty acid composition of the biomass will be determined using total 
lipid extraction (Bligh and Dyer) followed by SPE and transesterification/GC-MS analysis respectively.   
 
Work Package No.  2 Lead: IRIS 
Work Package Title  Sensor system for bacterial detection and culture purification 
Start Month 1 End Month 36 
Objectives: To develop effective strategies (for the in-line monitoring and management of bacterial contamination 
in algal culture , based on: a) developing rapid in-situ methods based on advanced NIR and Raman spectroscopy 
coupled with machine learning algorithm to quantify the level of bacteria in microalgae culture  (Task 2.1), and b) 
using the findings from the sensor system to develop a selective UV irradiation system f or reducing bacterial level 
(Task 2.2),  and c) refine cultivation strategies that favour the growth of beneficial bacteria (Task 2.3). 
Description of work:  
In this WP, IRIS and UCD will work together to develop effective sensor technologies for in- line monitoring of 
bacterial growth in algae culture and, using these technologies, to develop an effective  digestate pre-treatment and 
cultivation management strategies to control bacterial growth during algal cultivation on digestate -based medium 
(thus preventing culture crash). Alternative approaches will be investigated that will aid in overcoming challenges 
associated with bacterial contamination during algal cultivation in digestate-based medium , such as 2 -stage 
illumination using UV at different wavelengths and directed adaptation with symbiotic bacteria. WP1 and WP2 will 
be pursued in parallel with each other, enabling findings from WP2 to be directly integrated into work in WP1.  
Task 2.1:  In-line sensor technology to monitor bacterial level (M1 – 24). Lead: IRIS. Participant: UCD.  
IRIS will leverage a novel Multirange Spectroscopic Platform designed and engineered as a test rig to deliver the 
most suitable from the following sensing techniques from the one comprehensive platform: SWIR spectroscopy, 
NIR spectroscopy, VIS spectroscopy, Raman spectroscopy, Fluorescence spectroscopy. This self -contained 
multirange spectroscopic platform will allow the most successful configuration of techniques for tackling the 
demanding application of the monitoring of bac terial contamination in algal culture (optical techniques for 
parameters such as pH, biomass concentration, glucose and/or other bacteria metabolites such as butyric acid, 
fluorescence-based techniques to monitor chlorophyll content, which provides an indication of algal photosynthetic 
condition), as well as enable seamless data fusion, to obtain dramatic improvements in precision, accuracy, and limit 
of detection. As such, the platform will be used for measuring the predefined critical parameters and bacte rial 
 
55 DOI: 10.1039/C5EE02005K  
56 DOI: 10.1016/j.biotechadv.2019.107444.  
57 DOI: 10.1111/tpj.12823.   
58 DOI: 10.1016/j.algal.2015.12.020  
[HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-02-08] [Development of microalgae fuel production and purification technologies for advanced aviation fuels] 
34 
indicators and verified against the flow cytometry reference methods that have recently been optimised at UCD for 
the analysis of bacterial levels. Based on the results, the optimum spectral data fusion techniques will be defined for 
their configuration into a reliable and cost effective in-line monitoring solution based on a smart sensing device with 
automated data  acquisition system and machine learning algorithms to enable real- time data analysis and early 
warning systems when abnormal bacterial gr owth or contamination is detected, so that the system can trigger 
appropriate responses such as adjusting culture conditions, initiating mitigation measures, or isolating affected 
batches. Data gathered from this task will be employed in Task 2.2 for the d evelopment of bacterial management 
toolkit and WP6 for the building of the Digital Twin of the system (Task 6.4).   
Task 2.2: UV irradiation for bacterial management (M1 – 24). Lead: UCD. Participant: IRIS. 
Recent studies have demonstrated that bacteria and microalgae can acclimatise differently to UV irradiation , there 
the same treatment that inactivates bacteria was found to be ineffective for microalgae5. Based on these findings, we 
plan develop a 2- stage illumination system where we first expose the digestate growth medium (before algal 
inoculation) to UV irradiation to inactivate bacteria in the medium and then subject microalgae culture grown on 
the sterilised digestate to a range light quality sources (e.g. artificial day light, standard white light) and UV 
irradiation under different wavelength ranges and regimens (e.g. red/blue light supplementation at 662nm/430 nm, 
red/blue light mix, continuous and pulsed) in order to maintain low bacterial count, while boosting algal growth and 
lipid accumulation. The system thus has a dual purpose, enabling the sterilisation of bacteria on the digestate in the 
first stage while suppressing the growth of native bacteria present in the culture, and enhancing microalgae growth 
in the second stage. The efficiency of bacterial inactivation will be assessed using standard baseline methods (e.g. 
CFU count and flow cytometer) as well as in -
line sensors developed in Task 2.1. Lipid content and fatty acid 
composition during growth in the 2nd stage will be assessed using standard gravimetric and GC -MS methods, 
allowing for assessment of the effect of targeted UV illumination on lipid accumulation.  UV Parameters to optimise 
during the bacteria inactivation: wavelength, duty cycle, mode and energy efficiency. IRIS will contribute as a 
designer/provider of the engineered solution for UV irradiation with tailor-made UV LED lamps.  
Task 2.3: Symbiotic algae-bacteria interaction and adaptive growth (M19-36). Lead: UCD. Part.: IRIS. 
To further reduce the chances of bacterial proliferation leading to culture crash, the algae-bacteria interactions during 
algal growth on digestate will be studied at lab scale. Bacteria present in the algal culture can be divided into 
contaminant bacteria present in the digestate as well as native bacteria present in algal inoculum. The presence of 
contaminant bacteria is expected to be signif icantly reduced if the digestate based medium  has been previously 
subjected to microfiltration (Task 1.1) or UV irradiation (Task 2.2); however, native bacteria in the culture derived 
from inoculation can also pose risk of culture crash if they proliferate aggressively under nutrient-rich conditions 
afforded by the digestate medium. Hence, it is important to distinguish different sub -populations of bacteria and 
their roles in affecting algal growth. The algae species selected in Task 1.2 will be cultivated on standard medium, 
digestate medium or treated digestate medium and the bacteria community at these different conditions will be plated 
in universal media for the isolation of colonies. The bacterial species will be identified by 16S rDNA, and the main 
ba
cteria found will be inoculated with axenic algal cells to understand the symbiotic/beneficial or harmful relations 
between the algae and bacteria. Based on these results, culture conditions will then be adapted to favour the growth 
of beneficial bacteria, while reducing the growth of the harmful ones. An enriched cultivation with the beneficial 
bacteria will be also carried out to assess a possible improvement in algae growth. Flow cytometry and spectroscopic 
platform developed in Task 2.1 will be used to map the dynamics between algae and bacteria populations. 
 
Work Package No.  3 Lead: KIT 
Work Package Title  Cascading biorefinery for biomass purification 
Start Month 1 End Month 36 
Objectives:  To develop a cascading biorefinery for low -energy and low-solvent fractionation of wet microalgae 
slurry at high biomass concentration (100 – 200 g biomass / kg slurry) into aviation-fuel precursors (i.e. biofuel -
convertible lipids and cellulosic biomass residue) and food/feed components (i.e. protein-rich serum).  
We will a) investigate microalgal ability to self weaken (or autolysis) as the basis for efficient cell disruption (Task 
3.1) and b) develop extraction strategy using solvents (including bio-based solvents) which can be easily separated 
from wet algae biomass and enable solvent recycling. Overall, we aim to achieve a biorefinery with a target energy 
demand for cell disruption < 1 MJ/kg biomass and target solvent usage for lipid extraction < 3.5 L/kg biomass.  
Description of work: In this WP , KIT and UCD will work together at bench scale ( 10 – 100 g slurry ) to first 
investigate different combinations of autolytic incubation with mechanical and chemical cell disruption (Task 3.1). 
This will then be followed by the identif ication of  the best we t processing pathway for  cost-effective solvent 
extraction of lipids at low solvent usage. To achieve this objective, we will specifically investigate the use of non -
polar or low-polar solvents with high affinity to neutral lipids and capacity to form bi-phase with water. In order to 
achieve high purity lipid extracts, solvent systems will additionally be selected for low solvability to proteins and 
carbohydrates or to components from cultivation medium. Once the best extraction solvent has been selected an d 
the process is optimised to achieve the target lipid yield, WP3 will also investigate different methods to mitigate 
emulsion formation (e.g. mixer type) to facilitate optimum solvent recovery (target solvent recovery > 95%).  
Task 3.1: Autolytic cell -wall disruption for direct processing of wet microalgae (M1 – 18). Lead: UCD. 
Participants: KIT.  
[HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-02-08] [Development of microalgae fuel production and purification technologies for advanced aviation fuels] 
35 
Task 3.1 will investigate the development of low -energy cell disruption for wet microalgae biomass. For both 
saltwater species (N. salina) and freshwater species ( C. pyrenoidosa, A. protothecoides), the coupling of autolytic 
incubation with a range of mechanical (HPH and HSM) and chemical methods (acid hydrolysis) will be investigated. 
The parameters associated with autolytic incubation  (degree of anoxia, temperature) will be optimised to achieve 
maximum cell-wall weakening. The use of autolytic incubation as a pre -treatment that weakens microalgae cell 
walls is intended to reduce the intensity of operating conditions for mechanical or c hemical disruption (i.e. lower 
pressure configuration and less number of passes for HPH, milder pH for acid disruption) and thus the operating 
cost of biorefinery. The parameters for mechanical and chemical steps (e.g. pressure configuration for HPH) will be 
initially selected based on literature. The extent of cell disruption after the combinatorial treatment (or hybrid 
treatment) are to be assessed with a combination of light microscopy (cell counting + staining), flow cytometry and 
protein leakage in the  supernatants. The performance of the hybrid treatments will also be compared against 
standalone disruption treatments (e.g. HPH only, HSM only and acid hydrolysis only). The hybrid treatments that 
lead to the highest disruption for each species (as indica ted by flow cytometry) will be further parametrically 
optimised (e.g. pressure configuration, number of passes for HPH; rotation speed, temperature for HSM; pH, acid 
requirements for acid hydrolysis) to achieve maximum disruption (90 – 100%). Central composite factorial design 
complemented with response surface methodology (RSM) approach will be used to reduce the number of 
experiments and develop predictive mathematical models.  
For the freshwater species (C. pyrenoidosa, A. protothecoides), the combination of autolytic incubation with PEF-
treatment will be investigated in parallel. As autolytic incubation is known to increase cell wall permeability, a 
combination with PEF can be a promising approach to reducing disruption energy demand. In our previous studies 
on A. protothecoides, KIT has already shown that typical energy demands are of max. 1.5 MJ/kg biomass and can 
reasonably be reduced to 0.5 MJ/kg b iomass by optimizing the processing pathways. Similar protocols will be 
transposed to C. pyrenoidosa and efficiency of the treatment will be assessed by flow cytometry. Results from 
autolytic incubation + PEF hybrid treatment will be compared to those obtained for the other combinations and only 
the most optimum treatment will be used in T3.2 and, more importantly, transferred to scaling activities in WP6.  
The protein released into the aqueous medium of the microalgal slurry as a result of the hybrid treatment (i.e. 
autolytic incubation + HPH or autolytic incubation + PEF) will be measured via spectrophotometric methods and 
protein yield quantified in terms of total water -soluble protein in the biomass, demonstrating the cascading 
biorefinery potential of the approach for the production of both fuels and feed. The application of protein, however, 
will not be further investigated given the fuel focus of the project.  
Task 3.2: Solvent screening, recycling and emulsion management (M13 – 36). Lead: KIT. Participant: UCD. 
Solvent selection: screening will be performed on biomass that has been submitted to optimal disruption conditions 
as determined in Task 3.1. The solvents will be chosen among non- polar solvents and solvents of low -polarity. 
Solvents which are highly problematic for health, environment and safety issues are excluded. Possible candidates 
to be considered are: hexane, heptane, cyclohexane, ethyl-acetate, MTBE and 2-MeTHF. Disrupted wet microalgae 
slurry will be mixed with the selected solvents at  increasing biomass concentrations to achieve different solvent 
usage (2 – 10 L/kg biom ass). The mixture will be centrifuged, solvent phase collected and evaporated, and lipid 
yield measured gravimetrically. The extracted lipids will be further fractionated using solid- phase extraction and 
quantity of neutral lipids measured via both gravime try and GC -MS analysis. Lipid extraction efficiency will be 
calculated as a percentage of neutral lipids available in the biomass, determined via total lipid extraction (Blight and 
Dyer) followed by solid- phase fractionation. The best solvents for each species are those able to achieve lipid 
extraction efficiency >80% at low solvent -to-biomass ratio (<5 L / kg biomass). The extraction conditions using 
these solvents (e.g. extraction duration and agitation level) will be further optimised to reduce solvent usage to < 3.5 
L/kg biomass. This target seems reasonable since hexane extraction from PEF-treated wet A. prototheorids biomass 
at KIT and HPH-treated wet Nannochloropsis biomass at UCD have been demonstrated to successfully extract up 
to 80% of the lipids with 2-3 L of solvent per kg biomass.  
Under the same development boundary conditions as described above, the use of green or bio- based solvents (D-
limonene, ethyl lactate and methyl soyate) will also be tested. First, the technical boundary conditions will be 
established through comprehensive literature survey. If green solvents appear to be economically promising (based 
on the volumetric cost of the solvent and yield considerations), they will be included in the solvent screening. 
Emulsion mitigation to enable recycling: The issue of solvent/water emulsion formation resulting in solvent losses 
during centrifugation step of solvent recovery has not been extensively investigated in literature. The phenomenon, 
however, is difficult to observe and measure at b ench scale. For this reason, once extraction conditions have been 
optimised at bench scale, the best extraction systems will be tested at intermediate scale, i.e. an increase by two 
orders of magnitude with typically 30 g of biomass (ca. 300 g of wet slurr y). The amount of solvent that can be 
recovered from the extraction process will be monitored and methods that minimize the trapping of solvent in 
solvent/water emulsions will be investigated and optimised, such as adjustment of pH, temperature or ion stre ngth 
of the extraction mixture as well as agitating the extraction mixture at different speed and cycles. Methods that do 
not minimise emulsions and ultimately achieve solvent recovery to >95% will be disregarded. 
 
Work Package No.  4 Lead: UCAM 
Work Package Title  High-efficiency microalgal fuel conversion and purification 
[HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-02-08] [Development of microalgae fuel production and purification technologies for advanced aviation fuels] 
36 
Start Month 1 End Month 36 
Objectives: To develop and optimise catalytic pathways for high -efficiency conversion of microalgae biomass 
components (lipids and biomass residue) to aviation fuels and to develop purification methods for the production of 
high-quality fuels capable to achieving aviation specifications. 
WP4 will a) develop tailored multifunctional catalytic pathways and chemical looping process for 
hydrotreatment/hydrocracking of microalgae lipids into HEFA -SPK (Task 4.1, 4.2), b) investigate the application 
of thermo- catalytic reforming + hydro- deoxygenation (TCR -HDO) treatment for the conversion of microalgae 
biomass residue to a kerosene fuel (Task 4.4), and c) investigate purification methods of the fuel molecules for the 
synthesis of high-quality aviation fuels meeting ASTM specifications (Task 4.3 and Task 4.5).  
Description of work:  
In this WP, UCAM and Fraunhofer UMSICHT will work together at bench scale ( 1-20 g lipids and biomass 
residue) to develop advanced fuel conversion and purification technologies for microalgae biomass components. 
Task 4.1:  Multifunctional catalyst for hydrotreatment conversion of microalgae lipids into HEFA-SPK (M1 
– 24). Lead: UCAM. 
Previous studies producing SPK from algal oils have indicated problems with yields and catalyst deactivation due 
to the high content of oleic acid and metals in algal lipids Error! Bookmark not defined. , which suggests  that dedicated 
catalysts and lipid extraction methods can help optimise the hydroprocessing route with the algal feedstock.  
UCAM will start with catalyst development for two-step and one-step hydrotreatment of algae lipids. The two-step 
process will use transition metal (Ni, Mo, Co, Cu, Fe) -based catalysts for hydrodeoxygenation and Pt -C for 
isomerisation and hydrocracking, comparing to published results for other feedstocks59. The use of transition metals 
has been demonstrated beneficial for the deoxygenation of oleic acid 60, while the effective removal of other 
heteroatoms with Pt-based catalysts helps improve the hydrocracking yield from algal-lipids61. 
After learning from the proposed two-step hydrotreatment route, we will then work on developing an algae-specific 
bi-functional catalyst using transition metals -based catalysts on mild/medium -acidic supports 62 (mesoporous 
zeolites, silicoaluminophosphates, alumina, graphitic and a ctivated carbon) for one-step hydrotreatment, with and 
without the addition of sulphidation agents63 (e.g. dimethylsulphide). Acidic surfaces suppress decarboxylation and 
affect metal-support interaction; thus, the acidity levels of supports will be contro lled by dedicated support pre -
treatment steps. The development of bifunctional catalysts will progress systematically, varying Ni -Mo-Co-Cu-
Fe/support combinations, with the optimal composition established by employing machine learning (ML) methods. 
The catalysts will be characterised through temperature -programmed desorption and reduction (TPD -NH3, TPR), 
gas adsorption analysis (BET), X-ray diffraction, thermo-gravimetric analysis, SEM, TEM, and EDX.   
The hydroprocessing steps will be conducted in a bench- top micro-reactor (Autoclave Engineers BTRS, 5 MPa, 
650ºC) with a 30 cm-long tubular reactor, operating in a continuous down-flow mode, with two gas-liquid separators 
(hot and cold) for product fractio nation. The composition of the collected fractions will be assessed with GC and 
LC/MS, with results used to identify main reaction routes (hydrodeoxygenation, decarboxylation) by looking at the 
product distributions and length of alkane hydrocarbons. Deconvolution of the possible pathways will be conducted 
using multivariant correlations (principle-component analysis) supported with ML- algorithms for data predictions. 
Apparent or single -step kinetics will be assessed for selected catalysts in a Carberry Sp
inning Basket Reactor 
(Autoclave Engineers, continuous flow, up to 50 bar).  
Results from small-scale experiments will reveal (1) the best single-functional catalysts for a two-step process, and 
(2) the best bifunctional catalysts for a single -step HEFA-SPK process. We will then try the final approach: a 
combination of the catalytic material in one reactor (i.e. multilayer catalytic bed) for a novel combinatory single -
step algae-lipid HEFA-SPK conversion process.  
In months 1-36 of the project, in anticipation of a shortage of microalgal lipids generated within the project, HEFA-
SPK experiments at the mL -production scale will first be carried out with in- house blended lipids that mimic the 
algal lipid composition. The blend will be created by mixing differen t vegetable oils at various ratios to produce 
fatty acid compositions similar to those extracted with low -polar solvents from the three microalgae species 
investigated in SusAlgaeFuel. Lipid composition results from WP3 will guide the blending process. The lipids will 
also be enriched in metals (Mg, Ca, Cu)  to assess their effect on catalyst deactivation in the HEFA conversion steps. 
Task 4.2: Chemical looping to reduce H2 and energy requirements during HEFA-SPK synthesis (M13 – 36). 
Lead: UCAM. 
Small-scale experiments in Task 4.1 will provide information on catalysts and reaction mechanisms in 
hydrotreatment. In the next step, we will innovate the hydrotreatment process route by introducing a Cambridge -
developed flagship process to produce hydrogen via a c hemical looping route from propane (a by- product from 
HEFA hydrotreatment). An iron- containing oxide, exposed to the gas product stream from the HEFA route, will 
reduce while consuming propane. In a separate step, the reduced oxide will be regenerated with steam, producing 
H2. This H2 will be recycled to the HEFA-SPK process, making it more self-sufficient (Figure 1.2b).  
 
59 DOI: 10.1016/j.biombioe.2017.07.008  
60 DOI: 10.1016/j.renene.2019.03.030.  
61 DOI: 10.1021/ef301977b.   
62 DOI: 10.3390/catal9121063 
63 DOI: 10.1016/j.apcata.2014.11.007  
[HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-02-08] [Development of microalgae fuel production and purification technologies for advanced aviation fuels] 
37 
During Task 4.2, first, we will assess the achievable H 2 yields, dependable on the propane stream parameters and 
applied temperatures. Th en, we will investigate the heat requirements and heat release in both chemical looping 
steps, searching for possible heat integration opportunities. Finally, we will assess the influence of impurities in the 
HEFA-propane stream on the longevity of the che mical looping oxide. Task 4.2 will produce a novel HEFA -SPK 
route with renewable H2 sourced internally. Information on the optimised process parameters in HEFA -only and 
HEFA-H2 configurations will enable further integration work and the sustainability asse ssment of algal-dedicated 
pathways to SPKs in subsequent WPs. 
Task 4.3: Algal HEFA-SPK fuel purification (M13 – 36). Lead: UCAM.  
SPK samples from Tasks 4.1 will be assessed for their carbon distribution in normal, iso and cyclo- paraffins, and 
remaining content of other types of hydrocarbons and heteroatoms, as property indicators. The analysis will be based 
on high-throughput gas and liquid-chromatography, combined with mass spectroscopy and CHNS. Impurities at a 
lower level (metals, halogens) can still af fect the fuel performance, thus, will be investigated using ICP -MS. 
Physicochemical properties from thermogravimetric experiments (thermal stability, volatility) will be correlated to 
the obtained results for composition. We will then consider suitable purification techniques, assessing the potential 
routes depending on the required level of separation. Those will include further hydrothermal treatment (polishing 
and refining) using the equipment from Task 4.1, caustic treatment in batch experiments, and co mmonly used 
separation methods, mainly filtration and distillation. For the latter, we will device a microdistillation, microfluidic 
unit, suitable to work with the small feedstock of samples produced in Task 4.1. After the purification steps, samples 
will be again assessed for their composition and physicochemical properties, comparing the obtained results to the 
literature and state-of-the-art SPKs that fulfil ASTM requirements. If the property indicators proposed here suggest 
that ASTM requirements canno t be met directly after the purification steps, further discussions will consider 
potential fuel blending. The large set of data from Task 4.3 will enable us to devise a decision toolbox, proposing 
appropriate purification steps tailored to algal-derived fuels. 
Task 4.4:  TCR -HDO treatment for the conversion of microalgae residue to kerosene mixture (M13 – 36). 
Lead: UMSICHT. 
Fraunhofer UMSICHT will purchase algae biomass residue from commercial suppliers to carry out preliminary 
TCR investigation and devel op specific experimental protocols for microalgae biomass (M19 – 36). The specific 
activities to be carried for this Task are: 1) pre investigations of the pyrolysis condition in microscale using 
thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and/or differential scanning colorimetry (DSC), 2) in lab scale, pelletisation of 
algal biomass to make sure that they are compatible with the TCR reactor (TCR2 plant), 3) screw modification of 
TCR reactors to algal feedstock and adaptation of the TCR’s post -reforming section (fitting the height of the char 
bed) to ensure the right gas velocity and gas residence time within the bed, 4) optimisation of TCR operation through 
several trials to produce maximum oil yield from residue, 5) analyses of products: oil, gas and char in terms of their 
higher heating value (HHV), water content, elemental and mineral contents (ICP), and composition (gas online and 
gas calorimeter online), 6) hydro- deoxygenation or hydro treatment of oil fraction using different catalysts to 
produce drop- in biofuel comprising a mixture of  petrol, kerosene and diesel with physical and chemical 
characteristics that, after purification, are compliant with requirements according to EN590 and EN228 standards.  
Activities 4-6 will be repeated on the biomass residue feedstock obtained in WP6 using the procedure optimised on 
commercial biomass in Task 4.3. 
Task 4.5: Algal TCR-HDO fuel purification (M13 – 36). Lead: UMSICHT.  
After the TCR-HDO steps of the algae residues, the purification of the generated hydrocarbons will be carried out. 
For standard hydrocarbons, a distillation will be the required method, while in certain cases, an extraction with non-
polar solvents e.g. pentane might be required. Distillation will generate several fractions that will be isolated 
according to boiling temperature (petrol fraction from room temperature to 170 °C; kerosene fraction from 170 °C 
to 230 °C, and diesel fraction from 230 to 350 °C. The residue with boiling point higher than 350 °C can be recycled 
to the TCR plant for further thermal degradation. Extraction of fuel molecules with non-polar solvents is needed if 
there are still heterocompounds remaining in the hydrogenated fuel (e.g. sulfonated compounds due to a lack of 
hydrogenation). In this case, the solvent will be applied to extract the fuels out of the hydrogenated product.  
The content of aromatic compounds in aviation fuels is an important indicator of the overall quality of the fuel. As 
they are required to swell the gaskets in the tank of the aviation, a certain amount aromatic  compounds are needed 
in the (post purified) kerosene fraction. If the concentration of aromatics in the kerosene fraction falls below 
certification requirements, we can extract additional aromatics from the petrol fraction or diesel fraction and used 
the extracts to enrich the chemical profile of the kerosene fraction. 
 
Work Package No.  5 Lead: SFS 
Work Package Title  Process integration and whole life-cycle analysis 
Start Month 1 End Month 48 
Objectives: To assess the commercial scalability, well-to-tank social, environmental and GHG-emission impacts of 
the investigated microalgae biofuel production strategies in relation to systemic constraints.  
WP5 will a) use process simulations for the assessment of commercial  scalability (Task 5.1), and b) carry out a 
comprehensive Whole Life Cycle Analysis (including social LCA) to assess the sustainability of the process (Task 
[HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-02-08] [Development of microalgae fuel production and purification technologies for advanced aviation fuels] 
38 
5.2). This WP will use results obtained fr om bench-scale development in WPs1-4 for their analysis  and provide 
feedback to the WPs to enable iterative improvement. WP5 results will also guide decisions for scale-up in WP6.  
Description of work: In this WP, UCD and SFS will work together to conduct a rigorous evaluation of techno -
economic and socio-environmental impacts of the proposed value chain.  
Task 5.1: Techno-economic assessment and identification of major cost drivers (M13 – 36). Lead: UCD. 
UCD will use various process simulation software (e.g. Aspen Hysis, Pro -II) as well as open -source models to 
project the scalability of the proposed system if operated to produce 10,000,000 kg of algae HEFA-SPK per annum. 
The plant design will be based on the methods developed in WPs 1–4 utilising the data generated in the laboratory 
studies (such as growth rates, yields, water, energy and chemical requirements) to validate the model assumptions. 
We will utilise generally accepted cost models for CAPEX an d OPEX for current biorefineries. Two integrated 
process plant models will be created, one using a commercial refinery simulation software and the other an open -
source approach to enable a comparison with other standard refinery models and afford the flexi bility to evaluate 
uncertainty and improve optimisation. The production of algal biomass, the extraction of lipids from biomass, and 
the conversion of lipids to fuel will be simulated and the costs per litre of SAF determined. An optimization analysis 
and uncertainty analysis will also be carried out to allow for the identification of major cost sensitivities and provide 
early feedback to focus laboratory efforts in other WPs during bench-scale experiments.  
When developing the cost model, we will also inve stigate other means of enhancing the techno- economic and 
commercial viability of the biorefinery processes, including the recycling of water (e.g.  reusing water obtained after 
biomass harvest for subsequent cultivation cycles) and heat recovery within the biorefinery. We will also carry out 
a sensitivity analysis to measure the impact of process variations (e.g. growth conditions during cultivation and 
solvent-to-biomass ratio during lipid extraction) and uncertainty in the supply chain (e.g. availability of digestate, 
availability of water and transport distance for raw materials/nutrients) on the yield and overall cost of production 
of fuels. The task will provide a roadmap for cost reduction beyond project lifetime.  
Task 5.2: Life-cycle analysis and identification of socio-environmental hotspots (M13 – 48). Lead: SFS. 
The Whole Life Cycle Analysis (W-LCA) process encompasses four key components: goal definition and scoping, 
inventory analysis, impact assessment, and interpretation. Additionally, W -LCA incorporates a Social Life Cycle 
Analysis (S-LCA) as an integral part of the full system Life Cycle Assessment (LCA). Standardisation is a crucial 
part of the LCA process for SusAlgaeFuel. This Task ensures cross -party standardisation for the first two LCA 
components: boundary conditions (goal definition and scoping) and inventory analysis for microalgae -based SAF 
production. Establishing robust cooperation among various WPs is crucial for attaining accurate and reliable results. 
In this Task, SFS will conduc t a comprehensive assessment of the environmental and sustainability impact of the 
proposed microalgae value chain. The evaluation will utilise the latest approaches and simulations in life -cycle 
analysis (LCA) at both individual stages (microalgae cultiva tion, biorefinery, and fuel conversion) and the full 
system level, with a strong focus on carbon mass balance. A well -to-wake Life Cycle Analysis will be carried out 
following EU RED II (Plus upcoming RED III) and ICAO's CORSIA methodology, utilising SimaPro LCA software 
with EcoInvent's latest databases. The objective is to determine the CO2-eq/MJ value of the neat and blended algal 
SAF, including core LCA values and separately assess induced land -use effects (ILUC).  The LCA will compare 
the environmental impact of the proposed system to conventional microalgae systems, including cultivation using 
digestate and direct CO2 capture from AD industry. A wide range of environmental indicators, such as climate -
change, air-quality, water-quality, and non-renewable energy indicators, will be considered, providing results on a 
full range of Characterization Factors using CML 2001 methodology.  
To establish specific emission values of the blended SAF produced, the Greenhouse gases, Regulated Emissions, 
and Energy in Transportation (GREET) software (USA) will be utilised. Empirical verification will be conducted in 
partnership with an aircraft/engine Original Equipment Manufacturer OEM from the ATM D4054 test facility index. 
SFS will apply the RSB's 12 Principles of sustainability during WP5 to help align fuel production with international 
best practice and obtain ‘RSB EU RED Fuel' Certification. This certification is recognised by the European 
Commission, demonstrating compliance with the EU RED and RSB's stringent sustainability principles. 
Identification of opportunities for improvements in microalgae fuel production will involve calculating hotspots, 
calculated using bench- scale results from WP s 1-4 in the initial phase of the project (M13 – M36), and later 
derived/validated using project results from the scaling activities in WP6, as well as relevant information from 
existing literature. These findings will be fed back to the WPs to facilitate informed improvement and optimization. 
The final CO2 -eq/MJ value for the i nvestigated microalgal value chain will be compared with ICAO CORSIA 
default LCA values for similar SAF pathways and microalgae SAF pathways by other pathways. The WP will 
establish the final LCCA, including the full levelized cost of energy (LCOE). 
In parallel, a social LCA (sLCA) will be carried out to explore the social impacts and sustainability of the developed 
products and technologies, and their actual and potential positive as well as negative impacts along the life cycle. 
We will conduct a social assessment of the developed process and the pilot scale facility (built in WP6) to identify 
the main social risks and social impact categories (e.g working conditions, health and safety impact) associated with 
the process. Social analysis is important for a ll value chain actors. Key stakeholder groups will be identified, in 
collaboration with stakeholder engagement strategy activities in WP7, and accordingly social impacts will be 
assessed through sLCA study parameters. Limitations will be determined by considering that all stakeholders such 
as employees, raw-material suppliers and end users will be affected in the project value chain. 
[HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-02-08] [Development of microalgae fuel production and purification technologies for advanced aviation fuels] 
39 
 
Work Package No.  6 Lead: A4F 
Work Package Title  Pilot scale-up, fuel testing and digital twin 
Start Month 25 End Month 48 
Objectives:  To demonstrate the technical scalability of the technologies developed in WP1-WP4 to TRL4/5 through 
the build of a pilot-scale system an AD operator site (BIAE) and the operation of the system for the production and 
quality test of algal HEFA-SPK and TCR-HDO fuels according to ASTM standards.  
WP6  will a) build a pilot-scale algal production facility with the capacity of producing 10 kg of algal lipids p.a. on 
BIAE site (Task 6.1), b) operate the pilot system to produce sufficient lipids for the manufacture of 1 kg of algal 
HEFA-SPK (Task 6.2), c) convert the generated algal lipids and biomass residues to 1 kg of HEFA-SPK and TCR-
HDO fuels respectively, purify the fuels and test them for compliance with ASTM standards (Task 6.3), and d) 
develop a digital twin of the integrated fuel production system as a decision toolbox (Task 6.4).  
Description of work: A4F, BIAE, and UCD will first build/procure, and commission pilot -scale infrastructure 
comprised of cultivation and biorefinery unit operations on partner BIAE site (Kilshane, Ireland) according to the 
optimum technologies/specifications found in WP1-WP3. The work will demonstrate a scalable closed-loop system 
where microalgae growth is supported using waste nutrients directly derived from on-site AD operation. Once built, 
the pilot-scale system will be operated semi -continuously throughout Year 4 by the UCD team, after a period of 
training supplied by A4F. The operation will provide the lipid and biomass residue needed for fuel conversion and 
testing. Once sufficient amounts of lipids have been accumulated for the production of 1 kg of algal HEFA -SPK, 
both lipid and biomass residue will be dispatched to UCAM and UMSICHT for fuel conversion via the HEFA-SPK 
and HDO-TCR pathways, respectively. Rather than building a new pilot-scale infrastructure, fuel conversion will 
utilise large-scale infrastructure that already exists at UCAM and UMSICHT capable of processing the required fuel 
targets (1 kg of HEFA-SPK from the lipids and a minimum 1 kg of TCR-HDO oils from biomass residue) to reduce 
project costs. These infrastructures will be modified according to the specific requirements for algae as investigated 
in WP4. The resulting fuel molecules will then be purified according to the methods developed in WP4 and assessed 
for compliance to ASTM st
andard. In parallel, IRIS will develop a digital twin of the integrated system to simulate 
production performance under different scenarios/conditions, serving as a decision toolbox to guide stakeholders. 
Budget lines for building and commissioning of pilot-scale infrastructure have been distributed between BIAE, A4F 
and UCD, while appropriate budget for modifying fuel-conversion rigs has been allocated to UCAM & UMSICHT. 
Task 6.1: Design, build, and commission of a pilot-scale system comprised of cultivation and biorefinery units 
(M25 – 36). Lead: A4F. Participants: BIAE, UCD, IRIS. 
In this task, the detailed engineering design of the microalgae cultivation system will be developed by A4F according 
to the developments of WP1. This includes the photobioreactor for autotrophic cultivation (1,000 L), a pre-treatment 
system (microfiltration unit and/or UV irradiation system) to treat digestate and remove contaminating bacteria as 
developed in WP1 and WP2, a membrane-based CO2 delivery system to directly capture flue CO2 from biomethane 
upgrading facility as investigated in WP1, and a PAT spectroscopic sensor system to monitor bacterial level in the 
culture as developed in WP2.   BIAE will carry out the civil engineering work needed to prepare their site for algae 
infrastructure, before building and commissioning the system with the help and guidance of A4F. Unit operations 
needed biorefinery fractionation will be designed and sized by UCD according to the development in WP3. The 
system will include a cell disrupti on unit (selected based on performance in WP3), a lipid extraction unit, a phase 
separation unit, and a solvent recovery system with an integrated heat recovery system. The individual units will be 
purchased from commercial suppliers and assembled by UCD Workshop on BIAE site, adjacent to cultivation unit.  
Task 6.2: Operation of pilot system for production of lipids and biomass residue (M37 – 44).                                      
Lead: UCD. Participants: BIAE, A4F. 
After receiving training from A4F, UC D will operate the pilot -scale system built on BIAE site semi -continuously 
for 3 – 8 months in order to generate the lipids and biomass residue needed for fuel production in Task 6.3. Only 
one species will be selected for the operation; the selection of wh ich will be made based on findings from bench-
scale experiments in WP1. Growth and biorefinery conditions identified in WP1 and WP3 will be initially adopted, 
but will be further optimised in order to achieve maximum final biomass concentration (>3 g bioma ss/L) and lipid 
accumulation (> 30wt% biomass) within short harvest cycle (7-14 days) for the growth system and the recovery of 
>80% lipids at energy demand < 1 MJ/kg biomass for the biorefinery system at pilot scale. The performance of in-
line optical sensors in analysing bacteria/microalgae population dynamics will be analysed using real data obtained 
from the operation of the pilot system and compared against baseline methods (e.g. flow cytometer + staining). 
System performance data of the pilot system (e.g. energy and water requirements, solvent requirement) will be fed 
to WP5 (Task 5.2) for iterative life-cycle analysis and projection of environmental impacts of the proposed system, 
and to Task 6.4 for the development of a digital twin. The extracted lipids and biomass residues will be stored at -
20℃ until sufficient amounts have been generated for Task 6.3.  
In parallel to the biorefinery work carried out in the pilot -scale facility, A4F will investigate bead milling for wet 
cell disruption as baseline/standard method to provide direct performance comparison to the system in Task 6.1.  
Task 6.3:  Pilot fuel production, purification and testing for compliance with ASTM standards (M31 – 48). 
Lead: UCAM. Participant: UMSICHT. 
[HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-02-08] [Development of microalgae fuel production and purification technologies for advanced aviation fuels] 
40 
From month 25, the team at UCAM we will start designing a new rig/modifying our existing rig at UCAM to scale 
up the production of algae -derived HEFA-SPK. Conclusions from Tasks 4.1, 4.2 and 4.4 will guide the design, 
primarily including the hydrotreatment and purifications steps. If the scale up is successful, H2 production using our 
chemical looping approach will be added, connecting the new scaled up HEFA rig to our existing fixed bed reactors 
for thermochemical water splitting. The main goal of designing and building the scaled up pilot is to achieve 1 kg 
of HEFA-SPK product from the lipids generated in pilot-scale production in Task 6.2.  
The biomass residue generated from pilot -scale production will be processed at UMSICHT for the production of 
TCR-HDO oil. UMSICHT can operate a TCR 2 plant with a throughput of 2 kg of biomass ( currently available at 
UMSICHT site from previous project TOSYNFUEL). Drying and pelletisation of the algae residue will be required 
beforehand. The oil will then be hydrotreated and distilled/extracted by solvents.  
The resulting HEFA-SPK product (UCAM) and final TCR-HDO biocrude oil (UMSICHT) will be purified using 
the methods developed in Task 4.3 and 4.5 respectively before being analysed for compliance with ASTM D7566 
& DEFSTAN 91-91 standards by accredited service provider. Parameters to measure include acid number, content 
of aromatics and sulphur, density at 15°C, flash point, freezing point, viscosity at 20°C, heat of combustion, smoke 
point, naphthalenes, corrosion copper strip, thermal stability, metal content, halogens, N content, water content. 
Task 6.4:  Digital twin of the pilot system (M37 – 48). Lead: IRIS.  
IRIS will develop a digital twin of the pilot-scale facility based on an agent-based approach. The digital team from 
IRIS will engage with the design team from Task 6.1, to understand the design and operation of the pilot-scale algal 
SAFs production system and its various components, processes, equipment, and their interactions. The critical 
variables and parameters that affect the production process and performance will be identified  (e.g. algal growth 
rate, nutrient levels, and any other relevant factors). A detailed model of the pilot -scale system will be built, and 
each component, process and identified variables and parameters will be represented with appropriate equations, 
models, or algorithms (agent Interactions): and incorporated into the model. Real-world data from the operation of 
the pilot-scale production system in T ask 6.2 will be implemented into the digital twin for both ‘calibrating’ the 
parametrizable features and buildin g reduced -
scope (dedicated) models, when required, to define the agents 
behaviour. The model's accuracy will be validated by comparing its predictions with actual production data from 
the pilot plant. A series of different scenarios (such as varying nutrie nt inputs, light conditions, or different 
operational strategies) will be defined to explore the behaviour of the production system under different conditions,. 
The simulation outputs, i.e. the result from running the whole digital twin under certain param etrization (such as 
algal biomass production, SAFs yield), will be analysed to understand the impact of each scenario on production 
performance and to help in optimising the process and identify potential bottlenecks. 
 
Work Package No.  7 Lead: ESCI 
Work Package Title  Communication, policy and exploitation roadmap 
Start Month 1 End Month 48 
Objectives: To develop and implement successful strategies for dissemination, communication and engagement 
with stakeholders in order to maximise the impact of the project outcome and ensure its legacy. 
WP will a) implement a comprehensive communication and dissemination strategy to reach relevant stakeholders  
(Task 7.1-7.3), b) manage IPs and explore exploitation pathways for results commercialisation  (Task 7.4), and c) 
produce policy recommendations on algae SAFs at EU levels (Task 7.5). 
Description of work:   
Task 7.1: Communication, dissemination and exploitation strategy (M1-48). Lead: ESCI. Participants: All. 
The Dissemination; Exploitation and Communication Master Plan (DECMP) (D7.1) as outlined in section 2.2 will 
outline the multi-layered activities to maximise impact of the project results. Dissemination, Com munication and 
Exploitation actions will be monitored using MATOMO (a GDPR friendly version of Google Analytics) and 
BRANDWATCH for online activities, and questionnaires for events. Monitoring results will feed into Best Practices 
of Communication, Dissemi
nation and Dialogue Actions (D7.2; M18). The first version of D7.2 will be used to 
update the CDMP in M20. ESCI will train partners (2 courses) on maximising impact with social media.  The 
consortium will produce open- access peer -reviewed articles in high -impact scientific journals and present their 
results in relevant conferences and workshops. Within the last three months of the project, a final event will be held 
to present the project results to 100+ stakeholders. The Conference will include open sessions, round tables and 
workshops to enable different groups to get engaged during the event. UCD and ESCI will also produce a 
comprehensive Technical Brochure in an easy-to-understand language (D7.3). Research training will be offered on 
microalgae-related research, including an algae fuel summer research school for undergraduate students. 
Task 7.2: Communication activities (M1-48). Lead: ESCI. Participants: All. 
A variety of editorial, promotional and visual content will be developed to share on the project’s channels and media 
multipliers. The SusAlgaeFuel website and social media channels (e.g. Twitter, Linkedin) will become a meeting 
place for all stakeholders and establish links with other relevant projects and initiatives. Furthermore, promotional 
communication materials promoting the project and/or key results will be developed, including  leaflet, infographics; 
journalistic articles and interviews with technology and environment experts, end -users and other stakeholders. In 
addition, 3 videos will be produced, an introductory project video and one final summarising results, and 1 Video 
News Releases to be distributed through ESCI’s network of 250+ broadcast journalists to ensure broadcasting in 3 
[HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-02-08] [Development of microalgae fuel production and purification technologies for advanced aviation fuels] 
41 
national TV stations across Europe. Project visibility will  be enhanced with a Women -in-Science campaign 
promoting female scientists on SusAlgaeFuel.   
Task 7.3: Stakeholder engagement and networking (M1-48). Lead: ESCI. Participants: SFS, All. 
A mapping exercise will be initially carried out to identify key stakeholders relevant to the project. ESCI will extract 
this list from publications, media partners, CORDIS database, and websites across Europe. Of particular importance 
is creating a data set of previous/current EU/H2020/HE projects that have been funded in areas under CSA or RIA 
call topics related to microalgae biofuels or sustainable aviation. This includes other projects funded under the call 
topics HORIZON- CL5-2023-D3-02-08, HORIZON -CL5-2022-D3-03-07, HORIZON -CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-
01-16. Based on identification and mapping of relevant stakeholders for the project, SusAlgaeFuel will connect with 
other EU projects in the area to regularly exchange information and results, cooperate at workshops, conferences, 
and promote mutual project activities, such as joint webinars/seminars and cross-fertilisation activities. Additionally, 
SusAlgaeFuel will carry out regular demonstration workshop at our pilot-scale production facility (after the build is 
completed in M36) and invite key stakeholders relevant to the project from both Ireland and the EU to the workshops 
in order to increase awareness and promote pathways for commercialisation. SFS, UCAM and BIAE will also send 
communication bulletins to their wider network of fuel-industry and AD stakeholders, including SkyNRG, Avolon, 
Boeing, Orix Aviation, Marshall Group, Phillips 66.  
Task 7.4: Exploitation pathways and business-model development (M1-M48). Lead: UCD. Participants: all. 
Building from Section 2.2.3, UCD will draft the Consortium Agreement in M1 (to be signed by all project partners) 
outlining the project’s IP management strategy. A review and analysis of the most appropriate IP tools to protect 
potential research results w ill be carried out and catalogued during the preparation of the DECMP plan. The 
Agreement will also outline the procedure to determine ownership of foreground IPs generated during the project, 
allowing each partner to patent their own set of results, and e xploit IPs. UCD, through its experienced technology 
transfer office (TTO) and innovation hub NovaUCD, will leverage its expertise in supporting the partners in 
managing their IP and commercialisation activities. Project results will be analysed by the respective partners as 
they emerge for Freedom to Operate (FTO), patentability and protectability with up-to-date reviews.  
UCD will lead partners in developing a roadmap for commercial -scale deployment of the proposed value chain in 
the EU according to feedstock availability and distribution, and (anticipated) policy direction in renewable energy. 
On the one hand, the Business Model Canvas (BMC) will be used as a lean tool for facilitating business model 
development for each of the industrial partners (A4F, BI AE, IRIS, SFS) to define the core aspects of the 
commercialisation of their results. These BMC will then be iterated out to a more complete 
business/commercialisation plan, which will also consider financing route for the post project development lifecycle 
as well as the funding of the market entry towards TRL9 activities, in order to ensure a competit8ive Time to Market 
(TTM). On the other hand, because the proposed system will combine several stakeholders (AD operator, microalgae 
producers, sensor technology developer, fuel producer, various aviation stakeholders) in separate sectors within a 
single value chain, the financial benefits of the system for the individual stakeholders need to be verified. Of 
particular importance is understanding the potential market and revenue stream of the systems for each stakeholder 
and how this can translate to a profitable undertaking/model for all stakeholders in the future. This task will involve 
carrying out research/market interviews with industry stakeholders and lea d to the publication of a 
commercialisation plan outlining strategies for adoption by stakeholders (D7.4). 
Task 7.5: Policy analysis (M25 – M48). Lead: SFS.  
SFS will provide up-to-date information on the EU policy landscape over the project lifetime to greatly improve the 
environmental and commercial viability of the SAF, as policy compliance can be assured from an early stage. 
Attention will be given to advanced biofuel targets, energy multipliers and certificates awarded, as well as incentives 
and mandates to de-risk potential investment in microalgae biofuels. Furthermore, SFS will contribute to national 
government consultations to promote the introduction of advanced biofuels and accelerate the phase -out of fossil 
fuels. A membership of the Roundtable of Sustainable Biomaterials (RSB) through SFS offers the project access to 
a real-life sustainability framework. Through networking, webinars and exclusive RSB Platforms for SAF and policy 
discussion, the project aims to achieve RSB certification (D7.5), re cognised by the EC to meet stringent RED 
requirements. This RSB certification will underpin the case for up-scaling and trading the final SAF product within 
the EU, advancing the business case for future investors. At the end of the project, SFS will publi sh a white paper 
consisting of policy recommendations to promote algae SAFs based on project findings (D7.6). 
 
Work Package No.  8 Lead: UCD 
Work Package Title  Project coordination 
Start Month 1 End Month 48 
Objectives: To implement effective project management for timely achievement of milestones and deliverables: a) 
To coordinate all scientific, gender, administrative and financial activities (Task 8.1) ; b) To identify risks and 
implement mitigation (Task 8.2); c) To manage data according to FAIR and open-science principles (Task 8.3). 
Description of work:   
Task 8.1: Scientific, administrative, and financial coordination (M1 – M48). Lead: UCD. Participants: All. 
The Executive Board EB (comprised of Project Coordinator and WP leaders) will effectively coordinate the 
interdisciplinary project activities according to the proven project management structure outlined in Section 3.1 and 
[HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-02-08] [Development of microalgae fuel production and purification technologies for advanced aviation fuels] 
42 
monitor the overall project progress to ensure timely a chievement of milestones and deliverables . The Project 
Coordinator (Dr. Halim, UCD) support by Project Manager (hired at UCD) will be responsible for all aspects related 
to financial management, includ ing payments to the partners and financial reports to t he EC, and project 
administration, which includes the preparation of the Consortium Agreement, the timely delivery of project reports 
to the EC, preparation/implementation of Data Management Plan (D8.1), and consortium meetings. UCD is 
experienced in inclusive project coordination and will ensure effective management of gender and ethics aspects.  
Task 8.2: Risk management and contingency planning (M1 – M48). Lead: UCD. Participants: All. 
The EB will continuously monitor the project progress and, in the event of significant project delay/deviation, design 
corrective actions or authorise the execution of risk mitigation strategies described in Table 3.1e. The EB can also 
propose an amendment to the project plan and deliverables in cases when risk mitigation s trategies were 
unsuccessful in resolving risks. The EB will meet online every three months to discuss contingency planning.  
Task 8.3: Data management and open science (M1 – M48). Lead: UCD. Participants: All. 
The project will adopt a sound data management strategy in compliance with FAIR practices as proposed in Section 
1.2.8. The project coordinator (UCD) will draft a full DMP by month 6 (D8.1). SusAlgaeFuel will champion an 
open-science practice as described in Section 1.2.7, including open- access public ations for all journal papers 
resulting from the project via the ΄gold΄ or ‘green’ open access route and curation of data in open-access repositories. 
Table 3.1c: List of Deliverables 
No. Deliverable Name Short Description WP  Lead 
 Part 
Type  Deliv
ery