2.2 Measures to Maximise Impact – Dissemination, Exploitation, Communication #@COM-DIS-VIS-CDV@#   
2.2.1 Impact Strategy 
SusAlgaeFuel will develop an integrated dissemination, exploitation, and communication (DEC) strategy (Figure 
2.2a) designed to maximise impact and to be sufficiently flexible so as to effectively address the different target 
groups for the solutions proposed. The impact strategy aims to maximise the legacy of the project and the concrete 
actions will be outlined in the Dissemination, Exploitation and Communication Master Plan DECMP (D 7.1) 
This strategy paper will target stakeholders of the proposed value chain, such as AD operators, microalgae producers, 
biorefinery technology manufacturers, sensor system developers, aviation fuel/SAF producers , aviation  industry 
stakeholders, potential by -product users (e.g. f armers, fertiliser manufacturers),  academic community , fuel 
certification authorities, investors, policy makers, journalists and media companies, and consumers (i.e. people who 
fly). SusAlgaeFuel will elaborate the following key DEC goals:  
Goal 1: raising awareness and informing target groups of importance and potential of microalgae alternative fuels  
Goal 2: engaging in a dialogue with stakeholders along the algae value chain  
Goal 3: enabling knowledge transfer amongst the partners on specific designs, data sets, and methodologies; 
Goal 4: fostering exploitation opportunities for further research, policy and commercial adaptation. 
[HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-02-08] [Development of microalgae fuel production and purification technologies for advanced aviation fuels] 
26 
Dissemination and training strategy (Figure 2.2a): SusAlgaeFuel will select (1) the most suited journals, topics 
and events to publish the scientific results and reach relevant audience. They will be presented in (2) selected Open-
Access outlets and conferences, while fostering collaboration and engagement with relevant target groups. A 
mapping exercise will be carried out to identify key EU projects relevant to the area (Task 7.3), such as those funded 
by HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-02-08, HORIZON-CL5-2022-D3-03-07, HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-16, 
and  REFOLUTION, FLITE, and ALIGHT . SusAlgaeFuel will make a proactive approach to connect with these 
projects to promote mutual project workshops and seminar, with the view of organising joint seminars/workshops to 
expand the network and reach of dissemination activities. In addition, students and young rese archers will benefit 
from a Research Summer School in microalgae fuel dedicated lecture series at UCD, UCAM and KIT. Different 
stakeholders will also get the opportunity to engage with the project through regular demonstration workshop at the 
pilot-scale algae fuel production facility that will be built at BIAE during the project lifetime The evaluation of these 
actions (3) will be done through the review of citations, impact factor of journals, altimetric and feedback forms. 
Exploitation strategy (Figure 2.2a): The project will (4) identify Key Exploitable Results (KERs), target markets, 
potential users or clients and define the IP Management Plan in the Consortium Agreement. This forms the basis for 
developing potential (5) exploitation pathways and associated IPR strategy. By (6) monitoring the market, 
SusAlgaeFuel will review the exploitation strategy 
and refine it throughout the projec t. SusAlgaeFuel 
will also deliver a  commercialisation model  (D7.4) 
and policy w hite paper (D7.5) in order to harness 
project results, facilitate commercialisation and 
legislative adoption by relevant stakeholders beyond 
project lifetime. 
Communication strategy (Figure 2.2a):  A multi-
layer communication strategy will support and 
compliment the dissemination and exploitation 
activities, and will include (7) identification of 
appropriate communication channels and formulation 
of key messages for the various target groups. This 
plan will then be implemented to produce (8) original 
content including journalistic articles, press releases, 
videos, infographics and social media posts. 
Monitoring tools (9) will measure the outreach of these actions and, while some actions may achieve a better outreach 
than expected (and can be repeated), other actions that are less successful can be adjusted. 
2.2.2 Dissemination + Training Actions  
Table 2.2a – Planned dissemination actions for SusAlgaeFuel 
Industry workshops and networking events, webinars, and seminars  
(Some will be organised as joint events with other EU projects in the area)   
Goals 1-4 M13 – M48 
Key motivation: run industry/end-user workshops, webinars, seminars to engage stakeholders. Some of these events will 
be jointly organised with EU projects in similar microalgae, fuel, aviation areas . Target audience: AD operators, algae 
producers, f uel/SAF producers, aviation sector , by- product users,  sensor manufacturers, industry associations (e.g. 
EABA), investors, university students, air passengers. KPIs: 20+ events, reaching 800+ stakeholders 
Workshops at pilot-scale algae fuel facility on AD site (Kilshane, Ireland) Goals 1-4 M37 – M48 
Key motivation: run demonstration workshops to engage stakeholders. Target audience: AD operators, algae producers, 
fuel/SAF producers, aviation sector , by- product users, sensor manufacturers, fuel certification authorities,  industry 
associations (e.g. EABA), policymakers, investors, university students. KPIs: 4 workshops, reaching 800+ stakeholders 
Scientific publications (open access)  Goals 1,3,4 M13 – M48 
Key motivation: exchange scientific knowledge, provide technical details and open data 
Target audience: Academic community; Potential Journals (Impact Factor): Algal Research (IF = 5.276), Bioresource 
Technology (IF = 11.889), Chemical Engineering Journal (IF = 16.744), Frontiers in Energy Research (IF = 3.858).  
KPIs: >10+ peer-reviewed journal publications, reaching > 500 academics & leading to > 150 citations 
Conference presentations and fairs Goals 1-4 M13 – M48 
Key motivation: present scientific methodologies, results, and their impact ; Target audience: A D operators, algae 
producers, fuel/SAF producers, aviation sector, a cademic community; Potential Conferences: AlgaEurope, European 
Algae Industry Summit (ACI); KPIs: >12 presentations and >2 conference workshops reaching > 500 experts 
Microalgae Fuel Summer Research School Goals 1-4 M25 – M48 
Key motivation: provide summer research internships in microalga e fuel production with dedicated lectures on the 
technologies and methodologies developed in SusAlgaeFuel ; Target audience: University students; KPIs: 2-8 weeks 
combined research internship and lecture sessions for 5 -15 students, to be jointly coordinated/i mplemented by UCD, 
UCAM and KIT.  
Technical Brochure  Goals 1-4 M45– M48 
Figure 2.2a - Impact strategy of SusAlgaeFuel 
[HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-02-08] [Development of microalgae fuel production and purification technologies for advanced aviation fuels] 
27 
2.2.3 Exploitation Action and IP Management   
The consortium (led by UCD) will implement exploitation plans (WP7) to optimise the impact of project’s results 
after project completion. Exploitation will focus on creating new academic and commercial opportunities for algae 
fuel technologies and delivering fact-based information on renewable fuel technologies for policymakers. The project 
is set-up in such a way that the future opportunities for the exploitation of project´s results can be maximised, as the 
technology feasibility (demonstrated at TRL4/5) will be complemented with techno-economic and life-cycle analysis 
to assess scalability. The 11 Key Exploitable Results (KERs), comprised of novel methodologies and technologies, 
are listed in Table 2.2b . SusAlgaeFuel will identify exploitation means for e ach KER (e.g. in terms of licensing, 
spin-outs, or direct use) with the long-term ambition to contribute to the route to TRL9.  
Table 2.2b –SusAlgaeFuel’s KERs and summary of IP strategies by each partner 
KER  Owner Means of exploitation and/or protection 
KER1: Autotrophic growth 
strategy on digestate  A4F 
Utilisation of KER1 for the development of a new service for A4F’s clients 
based on the design, build operation and transfer (DBOT) of microalgae 
cultivation units using digestate. 
KER2: Membrane system 
for CO2 delivery to 
microalgae culture  
UCD 
Secure IP protection & pursue commercialisation activities via Technology 
Transfer Office & NovaUCD (innovation hub with experience in supporting 
360 start-ups-€760M turnover- from 2004-2019). KER2 will consolidate 
UCD’s growing knowledge basis in microalgae biotechnology to support 
formation of Irish microalgal spin-out specialising in wastewater treatment.  
KER3: In-line sensor for 
bacterial 
detection/enumeration  
IRIS 
Further develop, secure IP and commercialise the pioneering Multirange 
Spectroscopic Platform (‘Fusion’) for in-line monitoring of complex samples 
in Industry 4.0. KER3 will demonstrate the platform’s capacity for 
microalgae and open new market avenues.  
KER4: UV irradiation 
system for bacterial control  UCD 
KER4 and KER 5 will consolidate UCD’s knowledge basis in microalgae 
for wastewater treatment and biorefinery production of valuable products. 
Same exploitation pathways as KER2. 
KER5: Low-energy cell 
disruption based on autolysis  
KER6: Lipid extraction 
strategy to minimise solvent  KIT  
Secure IP protection through technology transfer division responsible for 
commercialization. Gained knowledge on solvent system and overall process 
design (KER 6) will be made available to equipment manufacturers. 
KER7: Multifunctional 
catalysts with H2 looping 
route for conversion of algal 
lipids to HEFA-SPK UCAM 
 
UCAM will engage with Cambridge Enterprise to ident ify and protect 
potential IPs from SusAlgaeFuel, further engaging in i-Teams and Cambridge 
Venture Project Opportunity (CVPO) projects to work on potential market 
pathways. The UCAM team already has 4 patent applications on catalytic 
material development and new process concepts, putting UCAM in a strong 
position to quickly translate future SusAlgaeFuel research outputs. 
KER8: Algae-specific 
HEFA-SPK purification 
method 
KER9: Route for conversion 
of microalgae biomass 
residue to TCR-HDO oil  UM-
SICHT 
 
For Fraunhofer UMSICHT, the new TCR route for the conversion of algae 
biomasswill offer a new market for fuel conversion and upgrading. By 
opening the TCR-technology for a new, promising biomass, they expect to be 
able to generate income in terms of royalties for Fraunhofer UMSICHT based 
on their worldwide patent (WO2015158732A1) and further research 
offers/investment from industry for the investigation of other algal biomass. 
KER10: Algae-specific 
TCR-HDO purification 
method  
KER 11: Pilot plant for full-
system process of converting 
digestate to microalgae-
based aviation fuel 
BIAE 
Pending outcome from the project, BIAE will consider further scale-up of 
pilot-scale facility (KER11) from 1,000L to 10,000L of microalgae culture 
for the treatment their effluents.  
We will exploit results from SusAlgaeFuel to create new commercial opportunities for algae fuel technologies. A 
key asset of our consortium is the participation of three industry partners from the value chain: A4F as an algae 
technology provider, BIAE as an AD operator (technology adopter), and IRIS as sensor developer and real -time 
Key motivation: produce a 30+ page technical brochure providing an overview of the different results of SusAlgaeFuel 
featuring photographs, infographics, and an easy-to-understand language; Target audience: fuel/SAF producers, aviation 
sector, policymakers, investors, air passengers; KPIs: 200 copies distributed digitally & as printed versions 
White Paper on Policy Recommendation Goals 1-4 M13 – M48 
Key motivation: Dissemination of results to policymakers to enhance exploitation of algae SAFs and to provide advice 
to EU policy. Target audience: Fuel certification authorities, EU projects in related area, and policymakers . KPIs: 50 
copies distributed digitally & as printed versions 
Engagement with policymakers Goals 1-4 M1 – M48 
Key motivation: consult policymakers on legislative actions to facilitate the adoption of algae fuel technologies  
Target audience: Fuel certification authorities, policymakers. KPIs: > 5 joint events leading to >100 new contacts  in 
policy making relevant to energy and environment 
SusAlgaeFuel final conference Goals 1-4 M46 – M48 
Key motivation: present key project results and their impacts ; Target audience: all, academic community, university 
students. KPIs: engage with >100 stakeholders and discuss project results 
[HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-02-08] [Development of microalgae fuel production and purification technologies for advanced aviation fuels] 
28 
monitoring/digital expert for  Industry 4.0 . This cohesive value chain of industry actors complemented with 
university and academic partners has a clear strategy (Table 2.2c and 2.2d) for how they will use the results of this 
project for their commercial activities and will ensure a credible pathway for further scale up and commercial 
exploitation of project results.  In Task 7.5, the industry partners will work using agile tools such as the Business 
Model Canvas (BMC) approach to design the business models for the post -project commercialisation of results 
towards more elaborated Commercialisation Plan (D7.4) that will be delivered at the end of the project.  
Management of Intellectual Property Rights (IPR): IP management will lie primarily with the project coordinator 
(UCD) and with individual partners generating the specific results. For the success of SusAlgaeFuel, it is essential 
that all project partners agree on explicit rules concerning IP ownership, access rights to any Background and Results 
and the protection of IP and confidential information before the project starts. SusAlgaeFuel propos es an 
encompassing IPR management strategy from the start of the project for the expected KERs The knowledge 
required for the project developme nt (Background), the knowledge generated (Foreground) as well as the Access 
Rights to foreground a nd background will be managed according to the principles and articles of the Consortium 
Agreement (CA), which will define the rules regarding confidentiality, privacy and patenting, publication and 
dissemination, and IP ownership. During the project’s lifetime, partners will be allowed to submit their own patent 
applications and exploit their IPs through creation of spin-out companies or licensing. Furthermore, in every project 
meeting, the consortium will have a standing action to report on commercially sensitive results and discuss specific 
IP options and plans. After the necessary IP protection has been successfully sought and attained, the results will be 
deposited in open- science repository and published reports/journal papers. Finally, Deliverable D7.4 
(commercialisation plan) in M48, will report on the different steps taken to properly manage IP within the 
consortium/project, as well as a final IPR strategy for optimal exploitation of SusAlgaeFuel ’s results. 
Exploitation of the project results to contribute to policy: SusAlgaeFuel will also deliver fact-based information 
on renewable biofuels for policy makers thanks to SFS partner’s extensive experience in aviation sustainability and 
policy. Since the latest targets set out by the EC under the revisi on to the Renewable Energy Directive (RED) have 
seen an increase in the share of renewable energy in the transport sector to at least 29%of final energy consumption, 
political agreement has been reached by national governments to reach these new targets, i ncluding those on 
advanced fuel and SAFs. SusAlgaeFuel will contribute to national government consultations to promote the 
introduction of advanced biofuels. This will be facilitated by the membership of the Roundtable of Sustainable 
Biomaterials (RSB) through SFS and the release of a White Paper providing policy recommendations (WP7) that 
will be aligned with 2018/2001 Carbon Offsetting and the Reduction Scheme for International Aviation (CORSIA).  
Certification as an enabler for the exploitation of project results: The project aims to achieve RSB certification, 
recognised by the EC to meet stringent RED requi rements. This RSB certification will underpin the case for 
production, up-scaling and trading of the final SAF product within the EU, advancing business case for investors.  
2.2.4 Communication Actions  
Table 2.2c - Planned communication actions for SusAlgaeFuel 
#§COM-DIS-VIS-CDV§# 
Online presence: SusAlgaeFuel website and social media (e.g. LinkedIn) Goal 1-4 M4 – M48 
Key motivation: Communicate project objectives and partners activities. Build a community of interested stakeholders 
and early adopters. Engage with stakeholders and develop a dialogue. Target audience: AD operators, algae producers, 
fuel/SAF producers, aviation sector, by-product users, fuel certification authorities, academic community, policymakers, 
university students, air passengers. KPIs: >10k web visits/year, 200 social media posts reaching 25k people.  
Internal Communication Training (provided by ESCI) Goal 3 M6 + M24 
Key motivation: improve the consortium’s ability to communicate on social media and to the press about the project and 
its results. Target audience : consortium partners . KPIs: 2 trainings for >20 persons to increase outreach success by 
partners by 50-100% (social media impressions) 
Promotional content: roll-ups, posters, infographics, videos Goal 1,3,4 M1 – M48 
Key motivation: provide relevant information to potential adopters. Promote the project and its results.  
Target audience:, AD operators, algae producers, fuel/SAF producers, aviation sector, by- product users, industry 
associations, academic community, policymakers, investors. KPIs: 1 leaflet, 6 infographics, roll-ups, posters, 2 project 
videos >10,000 stakeholders reached through promotional actions 
Journalistic content & mobilisation of stakeholders  Goal 1-4 M1 – M48 
Key motivation:  inform about best practices and tell inspirational stories on the research /production of microalgal 
aviation fuels, report both pros and cons of the proposed solutions and raise awareness of the issue to publishing houses 
and media outlets, create a dedicated communication flow and launch EU-wide awareness campaigns. Target audience: 
industry associations, general public/air passengers, journalists/ social media influencers. KPIs:  8+ interviews, 6+ 
journalistic articles, 1 video news release, press releases >500k citizens reached on various channels (online, print, TV) 
Women-in-Science Campaign  Goal 1,2 M18 – M36 
Key motivation: promoting female role models in science by featuring women within the SusAlgaeFuel project, telling 
their personal stories how they pursued scientific careers and overcome societal challenges.  
Target audience: university students and general public/air passengers. KPIs: >20,000 citizens (online, print) 
[HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-02-08] [Development of microalgae fuel production and purification technologies for advanced aviation fuels] 
29 
#§IMP-ACT-IA§#