4. Objective 4  (WP4): To develop and optimise catalytic pathways for high -efficiency conversion  of 
microalgae biomass components (lipids and biomass residue) to kerosene m ixture and to develop 
purification methods for the production of high-quality SAFs capable to achieving aviation specifications. 
a) To develop hydrotreatment and hydrocracking pathways for conversion of microalgae lipids into HEFA -SPK  
capable of achieving >50% conversion through the use of tailored catalytic composites comprising transition 
metals (Ni-Mo-Co-Cu-Fe) and mild/medium acidic supports (Task 4.1).  
b) To couple the HEFA-SPK catalytic pathways with a flagship chemical looping process developed at UCAM 
to minimise hydrogen consumption and investigate heat-integration opportunities (Task 4.2). 
c) To investigate the application of novel thermo-catalytic reforming + hydro-deoxygenation (TCR-HDO) pathways 
patented by Fraunhofer UMSICHT for conversion of microalgae biomass residue to kerosene fuel (Task 4.4). 
d) To develop purification methods for the resulting HEFA -SPK and TCR -HDO fuel molecules to enable the 
production of high-quality aviation fuels meeting ASTM specifications (Task 4.3 and Task 4.5). 

[HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-02-08] [Development of microalgae fuel production and purification technologies for advanced aviation fuels] 
4 
5. Objective 5 (WP5): To continuously assess the commercial scalability, well -to-tank social, environmental 
& GHG-emission impacts of the investigated microalgae fuel production strategies  to enable i terative 
optimisation 
a) To use process simulations for the investigated process to assess commercial scalability of the value chain, 
identification of major cost drivers and further optimization opportunities (Task 5.1).  
b) To carry out a comprehensive Whole Life Cycle  Analysis (WLCA) utilising innovative socio- technical system 
approach (STS) at the complete system level  to fully assess the social effects, environmental impact and 
sustainability of the proposed algae-fuel value chain, and to identify socio-environmental hotspots (Task 5.2). 
The techno-economic and LCA results will provide technology development in WPs 1-4 with iterative feedback 
and the SusAlgaeFuel team with the most optimal option for scaling up during pilot production in WP6.  
6. Objective 6: To demonstrate the technical scalability of SusAlgaeFuel process (at TRL5) through the build, 
commission, and operation of a pilot-scale system on BIAE site with the capacity for direct capture of CO2 
from biogas upgrade, treatment of liquid digestate and production of microalgal lipids.  
a) To build a pilot-scale algal production facility comprised of optimum cultivation and biorefinery unit operations 
developed in WP1-WP3 with the capacity of producing 10 kg of algal lipids p.a. (Task 6.1). 
b) Using the optimum species found in WP1, to operate and optimise the pilot system under semi -continuous 
strategy (for 2 -3 months) to produce sufficient lipids for the manufacture of 1 kg of HEFA-SPK (Task 6.2).  
c) Using the conversion and purification technologies developed in WP4, to produce 1 kg of HEFA -SPK from the 
lipids and 1 kg of TCR-HDO oil mixture from the cellulose-rich biomass residue obtained in Task 6.2, and to test 
the resulting fuels for compliance with ASTM standards. (Task 6.3). 
d) To develop a digital twin of the integrated system as a decision toolbox to guide future stakeholders (Task 6.4). 
7. Objective 7: To implement successful strategies for dissemination, communication and exploitation.  
a) To develop and implement a comprehensive communication strategy to reach stakeholders (Task 7.1-7.3).  
b) To disseminate impactful results, including workshops on pilot-scale infrastructure built in WP6 (Task 7.1-7.3). 
c) To collaborate with other EU initiatives in the same area to share knowledge and boost outreach (Task 7.1-7.3). 
d) To manage IPs and explore exploitation pathways for commercial utilization of results (Task 7.4). 
e) To produce policy recommendations for algae usage in aviation fuels at national and EU levels (Task 7.5). 
A primary innovation that SusAlgaeFuel will bring about to enhance the sustainability, circularity and feedstock basis 
of microalgae SAFs is the utilisation of AD by -products (liquid digestate and CO2 emission from biogas upgrading 
process) as nutrients for microalg ae growth, linking the two sectors together in a win -win synergy which provides 
mutual benefits (by- products valorisation for AD and a cheap and abundant nutrient supply for microalgae). AD 
harnesses the power of microorganisms to convert agricultural and food waste to biomethane. The process is expected 
to play a critical role in EU’s long- term pursuit for energy independence and decarbonisation, as one of the few 
technologies able to supply drop-in replacement for natural gas, the supply for which the EU is so heavily reliant on 
imports. The AD process, however, generates two principal by- products for which there is either no outlet for 
utilisation (i.e. CO2-rich gas effluent from biogas upgrade to form biomethane) or the current pathway for valorisation 
yields a low -value product (i.e. full digestate as very dilute fertilisers) with large distribution costs due to the EU 
Nitrates Directive (91/676/EEC)  resulting in significant costs to AD operators . The process envisaged in 
SusAlgaeFuel will enable  the development of a green strategy for nutrient recovery from both AD by- products, 
leading to the production of nutrient-dense biofertilisers (from digestate’s solid fraction after phase separation) and 
microalgae biomass (from digestate’s liquid fraction and CO2 effluent).  
The technologies investigated in SusAlgaeFuel have the potential to generate step reduction in the cost of algal SAFs. 
This will be achieved through a series of cost-cutting innovations in each processing step, including: 
• cost of nutrients during cultivation (by using AD by-products instead of commercial CO2 and fertilisers) 
• cost of energy during biorefinery (by investigating cell disruption that relies on microalgae self-lysing properties) 
• cost of solvent during biorefinery (by using a solvent system that enables facile recovery and maximum recycling),  
• cost of hydrogen during HEFA-SPK conversion (by developing a flagship chemical looping process).  
SusAlgaeFuel will adopt a staggered approach, where technological development/optimisation at bench scale will 
take place in the first three years of the project before being transferred into the building and commissioning of 
a pilot-scale system on an AD operator site (production capacity = 10 kg lipids/year) on the BIAE site in Ireland 
in the final year. The scale up is intended to demonstrate technical scalability (up to TRL 5) while also generating 
sufficient final fuel products fuel-quality assessment and certification according to ASTM standards.  
1.1.3. Beyond State-of-the-Art   
SusAlgaeFuel will introduce nine innovative approaches/technologies which individually push beyond the current 
state-of-the-arts at different s tages in microalgae value chain (cultivation WP1, culture purification  WP2, 
biorefinery/biomass purification WP3 and fuel conversion/purification  WP4).to produce a cohesive system for a 
more cost-competitive, efficient, and circular production of microalgae SAFs. These approaches will be developed 
with an integrated techno-economic and life-cycle analysis (WP5) to facilitate improvement and scale-up (WP6). 
[HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-02-08] [Development of microalgae fuel production and purification technologies for advanced aviation fuels] 
5 
A novel membrane system for an effective delivery of CO2 to microalgae culture with high carbon utilisation 
efficiency or CUE (>90%), enabling direct capture of CO2 from biogas upgrade (Objective 1//WP1).  
Current state:  All conventional methods to directly deliver gaseous CO 2 into microalgae culture involve the 
conversion of CO2 into bubbles (e.g. sparging, microbubblers, and sumps3,4). The short residence time (0.022 – 55s 
at 0.3 m pond depth)  associated with bubble delivery means that s ignificant amounts of CO 2 escape into the 
atmosphere before they can be captured by microalgae via photosynthesis, leading to a low CUE and higher energy 
cost associated with CO 2 delivery. Advancement: In WP1, we will investigate a novel CO 2 delivery system using 
dense membrane to achieve bubbleless CO2 delivery into microalgae culture (and thus high utilisation efficiency), 
enabling effective CO2 capture from direct point source. System will be validated with CO2 mass transfer model. 
A cultivation system capable of direct capture of CO2 emissions from biogas upgrade and digestate treatment 
to achieve high biomass concentration (Objective 1//WP1).   
Current state: Microalgal cultivation on full digestate can often lead to a highly turbid medium which requires 
significant dilution to support autotrophic growth. Using the full digestate as growth medium also precludes the  
application of excess nutrients as valuable bi ofertilisers. SusAlgaeFuel, will focus on using only the supernatant 
obtained after phase separation (referred to as ‘liquid digestate’) for algal growth, enabling the formation of nutrient-
dense biofertilizer from the solid fraction of digestate after phase separation (or ‘solid digestate’) as a co -product 
(Figure 1.1). Advancement: In WP1, we will establish a comprehensive strategy for supporting algal growth on liquid 
digestate by a) using a multi-step filtration process at different pore sizes to remove solid particles and bacteria from 
liquid digestate  and b) employing extensive chemical characterisatio n to determine  minimum dilution and 
requirements of micronutrients addition. Once growth on liquid digestate has been optimised, we will combine the 
growth strategy with the CO2 membrane delivery system, enabling the development of a hybrid cultivation system 
that is able to directly capture CO 2 emission while recovering nutrients from digestate to achieve high biomass 
productivity (target final biomass concentration > 3 g biomass/L) and lipid content (target > 30wt% of biomass).   
A-first-of-a-kind multirange spectroscopic sensor platform capable of bacterial detection and enumeration 
in microalgae culture (Objective 2//WP2). 
Current state: The presence of undesired bacteria in microalgal culture can often lead to costly culture crashes. There 
is currently no known in-line monitoring system able to analyse bacterial population dynamics in microalgae culture 
in-situ and provide early warning for catastrophic contamination level to enable corrective actions; such a detection 
system is particularly critical for culture grown on wastewater or nutrient-rich waste products (e.g. liquid digestate). 
Advancement: In WP2, we will leverage an innovative Multirange Spectroscopic Platform  developed at IRIS to 
investigate a modular, rapid, and affordable sensor system able to distinguish bacterial cells from microalgae cells 
and enumerate the level of bacterial contamination. The fusion platform will simultaneously utilise SWIR, NIR; VIS, 
Raman; and Fluorescence spectroscopy and be coupled with machine learning to enable future automation.  
A bacterial management system that uses selective UV irradiation (Objective 2//WP2). 
Current state:  Recent s tudies have shown that  microalgal cells and bacterial cells can react differently to UV 
irradiation, with the same treatment often resulting in bacterial inactivation while maintaining algal growth (and often 
boosting lipid accumulation)5. Such differential acclimatisation can potentially be exploited as means of managing 
bacterial population in microalgal culture, particularly those grown on waste products or nutrient-rich waste medium. 
Advancement: In WP2, we will develop a targeted 2-stage UV illumination regime for the investigated microalgae 
species under different wavelengths  to a) sterilise growth medium (as a complement to filtration systems) and b) 
favour the growth of microalgae cells and symbiotic native bacteria in the culture over harmful bacteria  to enable 
productivity boost. The effectiveness of the UV system will be validated with the developed spectroscopic platform.   
A first-of-a-kind biorefinery which harnesses microalgal intrinsic capacity for self-weakening (or autolysis) 
for the development of low-energy biomass fractionation (Objective 3//WP3). 
Current state: Biomass drying is highly energy intensive with the amount of energy required for complete water 
removal (10.9 MJ/kg biomass) exceeding the full lipid- energy potential of the biomass (10.1 MJ/kg biomass for 
biomass containing 30 wt% lipids). Drying must therefore be avoided to ensure a positive energy balance for fuel 
application. Wet biorefinery systems, how ever, require cell disruption which is either chemical intensive  (e.g. 
enzymatic or chemical) or energy intensive (e.g. mechanical methods). Autolysis,  a self -decomposition process 
where cells use their own endogenous enzymes to degrade /weaken their cell walls, can be coupled with externally 
applied cell disruption to reduce the intensity of these methods. Advancement: In WP3, we will leverage the discovery 
that PI Halim (UCD) recently made on the expression of autolysis in highly concentrated microalgae slurry (100 – 
200 mg biomass/g slurry) to develop a novel biorefinery system able to fractionate biomass into lipid, protein and 
carbohydrate at low energy requirements (target energy demand for disruption < 1 MJ/kg biomass). 
 
3 DOI: 10.1016/j.biortech.2015.12.066  
4 DOI: 10.1016/j.cjche.2018.07.013  
5 DOI: 10.1007/s10811-018-1687-8    
[HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-02-08] [Development of microalgae fuel production and purification technologies for advanced aviation fuels] 
6 
A lipid extraction strategy that minimises solvent usage through the use of non -polar solvents, emulsion 
mitigation and optimisation of solvent recycling (Objective 3/WP3).  
Current state: Our calculations show that the direct purchase cost of solvent and the indirect cost of energy associated 
with solvent recovery can account for up to 42 % the operating cost of  a microalgal biorefinery. Optimal solvent 
choice that allows for maximum lipid extraction at minimum solvent usage is therefore critical in achieving 
commercial viability of algal fuel s. Polar solvents (e.g. ethanol, isopropanol) form monophase with water during 
extraction from wet biomass and are difficult to recover, leading to high solvent requirements. Advancement: In WP3, 
we will screen a range of non-polar. and low-polar solvents (e.g. hexane, cyclohexane, ethyl-acetate) for selective 
extraction of HEFA-SPK convertible lipids, and develop strategies t o reduce solvent usage through mitigation of 
emulsion and optimisation of solvent recycling (target solvent usage < 3.5 L/kg biomass). 
A flagship microalgal-specific multifunctional catalytic pathways using transition metals and H2 looping route 
for efficient hydrotreatment conversion of microalgae lipids into HEFA-SPK (Objective 4/WP4).  
Current state: The conversion pathways for algae lipids to HEFA-SPK are not well understood, with early reports 
indicating accelerated catalyst ag ing compared to  HEFA routes with vegetable oils and low SPK yields. Since 
microalgal lipids contain a higher fraction of oleic acids (C18:1) compared to plant oils, they are not very reactive to 
Pt-based catalysts. Advancement:  In WP4, we will develop a  novel algae-specific bifunctional catalyst using 
transition metals (Ni-Mo-Co-Cu) on mild/medium-acidic supports (e.g. mesoporous zeolites) to improve conversion 
efficiency and introduce a flagship chemical-looping process (recently developed at UCAM) to minimise hydrogen. 
A flagship microalgal-specific thermocatalytic reforming + hydro-deoxygenation (TCR-HDO) treatment for 
the conversion of microalgae biomass residue to kerosene mixture suitable for aviation (Objective 4/WP4). 
Current state: Pyrolysis of biomass (like algae) generates a dark brown oil consisting of more than 100 different 
compounds, including oxygenated compounds (e.g. aldehydes or carbonic acids ), nitrogenated cyclic compounds, 
and sulfonated compounds. This oil mixture  is not suitable for engine application, in addition to the exhausts of 
sulphur and nitrogen oxides. In contrast to conventional pyrolysis techniques , TCR produces a thermally stable oil 
that can then be subjected to hydrogenation or HDO (at 400 °C and 120 bars) to remove the hetero atoms O, N, S in 
form as H2O, H2S, NH3 and generate saturated olefines. The resulting product is a mixture of hydrocarbons comprised 
of diesel, kerosene and petrol fraction s that can conform to  ASTM standards upon purification. Advancement: In 
WP4, we will demonstrate for the first time  that the TCR-HDO configurations patented by Fraunhofer 
UMSICHT (WO2015158732A1) can be applied for the conversion of cellulose-rich algae biomass residue to fuel.  
Tailored purification methods for algal fuel molecules to generate SAFs that meet international standards.  
(Objective 4/WP4).  
Current state: SAFs must fulfil ASTM standards  to ensure safe operations during flight . Fuel properties directly 
correlate to composition and the level of impurities . The amounts of impurities can be minimised through refining 
steps and fuel purification. Advancement: In WP4, we will investigate the combination of possible fuel upgrading 
steps that are most optimal for the algal-derived SAFs. Our goal is to correlate the key physical properties (thermal 
stability, volatility) with carbon distribution in the fuel components and the content of inorganics to define a minimum 
set of purification steps. Separate purification pathways for HEFA-SPK and TCR-HDO oils will be investigated 
Continuous assessment of the commercial scalability  and environmental impact  of technologies being 
developed using process simulations and the latest approach in Whole Life Cycle Analysis (Objective 5/WP5)  
In WP5, we will complement technology development in WPs1- 4 with continuous and iterative use of process 
simulations (e.g. Aspen Hysys) to assess commercial scalability of the value chain  and identify major cost driver   
and a comprehensive Whole Life Cycle Analysis (WLCA) utilising innovative socio -technical system approach 
(STS) at the complete system level to fully assess the social and environmental sustainability of the value chain. 
A fully integrated prototype pilot-scale system on an AD operator site as demonstration of technical scalability 
for SusAlgaeFuel process with the capacity for the production of 10 kg lipids/year and direct carbon capture 
and digestate remediation from the AD plant (TRL4/5) (Objective 6/WP6). 
SusAlgaeFuel will culminate with the building and commissioning of a pilot-scale facility on BIAE site that integrates 
the technologies developed/ investigated at bench scale throughout WP1- WP4 as a proof -of-concept of process 
scalability beyond project lifetime. The pilot- scale facility will be operated for a minimum of 3 months to produce 
sufficient algal HEFA -SPK and TCR -HDO fuels for testing agai nst international fuel standards.  The pilot-scale 
facility will serve as an exploitation tool for the project; where we will showcase the technologies to stakeholders 
and investors via on-site workshops.  
INDUSTRY4.0 for the manufacture of a lgal SAFs: The concepts of data-driven analysis and next generation 
computer technology are deeply embedded in SusAlgaeFuel technological development, with the view of preparing 
microalgae productions for an autonomous and AI-driven manufacturing in the future. These include the integration 
of machine learning algorithms in the development of spectroscopic biosensor platform (WP2), use of multivariant 
correlations supported by machine learning algorithm for d econvolution of the possible fuel conversion pathways 
(WP4) and the development of a digital twin inegrating real-time data from pilot-scale prototype (WP6).  
[HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-02-08] [Development of microalgae fuel production and purification technologies for advanced aviation fuels] 
7 
1.1.4. Project Maturity  
Table 1.1: The Maturity of SusAlgaeFuel Technologies #§PRJ-OBJ-PO§#  
1.2. Methodology  #@CON-MET-CM@# #@COM-PLE-CP@#                                                               
1.2.1. Approach 
HEFA-SPK pathway vs FT-SPK or ATJ-SPK pathways 
Microalgae biomass can be converted to jet fuels through various pathways, including full -biomass gasification 
routes (FT-SPK or ATJ-SPK). The HEFA pathway offers a commercially mature route for short-term deployment to 
address immediate fuel shortage and has thus been selected as SusAlgaeFuel’s primary approach.  
Route to Market:  Existing commercial-scale HEFA facilities  can readily accept raw algae- derived lipids, 
streamlining the manufacturing process. EU SAF Mandates:  The European Commission recognizes HEFA for 
Sustainable Aviation Fuel (SAF), where algae-derived lipids could supplement constrained UCO and tallow supply. 
Valuable Co-products: Algae HEFA-SPK biorefinery route leads to generation of valuable co- products, such as  
high-quality proteins and biofertilisers, that can offset cost of fuel production rather . Fuel quality: HEFA -SPK 
pathway produces jet fuel with high cetane number and low sulphur content. 
Overview: SusAlgaeFuel is divided into eight WPs designed to complement each other in delivering an integrated 
solution for microalgae jet fuel production. In the first phase of the project  (M1–36), WPs 1 -4 will focus on 
overcoming critical bottlenecks in microalgae fuel production (as outlined in Section 1.1) through the development 
of scalable core technologies for three lipid-rich microalgae species (C. pyrenoidosa, A. protothecoides, N. salina). 
The results from bench experiments in WPs 1-4 will then be transferred to the build of a pilot -scale facility in the 
second phase of the project (WP6 ‘Pilot scale-up, fuel testing and digital twin’, M30-48) to provide demonstration 
of the technical scalability of the investigated process and generate high- quality fuels for ASTM quality analysis. 
The number of species and technological options deployed in WP6 will be narrowed down according to the results 
of WPs1-4 and the feedback provided by WP5 ‘Process integration and whole life -cycle analysis’. WP5 runs in 
parallel to core technology development and pilot s cale-up throughout project lifetime, using results from the 
respective WPs to continuously carry out process integration and environmental assessments and relaying these 
results back to the WPs in a circular loop to enable iterative optimisation. Consolidated results obtained in WP5 will 
then be used to guide decisions  and inform best practice/parameters for scale- up in WP6. To provide clear 
exploitation pathways from the lab to industry, WP7 ‘Communication, policy and exploitation roadmap’ will develop 
a business/commercialisation plan (that takes into account inputs from Stakeholders within the consortium and wider 
sectors) and policy guidance, both rooted in the EU market. WP8’Project coordination’ will tie all scientific, 
administrative and financial activities together while identifying risk and implementing mitigation measures.  
WP1: Membrane system for efficient CO2 delivery to microalgae, enabling direct CO2 capture AD 
Challenges facing direct CO 2 capture from point emission by microalgae. The capacity for c arbon capture from a 
point emission source is one of the key benefits of microalgae cultivation. Conventional methods to directly deliver 
gaseous CO2 into aqueous microalgae suspension ( e.g. sparging, microbubblers, and sumps), however, involve the 
conversion of the CO2 into bubbles (1–5 mm in diameter) or microbubbles (0.02– 0.1 mm). A primary drawback of 
bubble-based delivery is its short residence time in aqueous suspension (0.022–55s at 0.3 m pond depth)3,4 meaning 
that the majority of CO2 delivered into the culture from point source is lost to the atmosphere before it can be captured 
by the microalgae via photosynthesis. This leads to a low Carbon Utilisation Efficiency (defined as the proportion of 
delivered CCO2 that is converted to biomass) and high energy cost associated with gas compression to deliver excess 
CO2. CUE averages at 40% for bubbles and 70% for microbubbles4.  
Key Technologies WP Pre-project TRL Post-project TRL 
Autotrophic growth strategy on liquid digestate 1 3 4 -5 (via pilot scale up) 
Membrane system for CO2 delivery to microalgae 1 2 4 - 5 (via pilot scale up) 
In-line sensor to monitor bacteria in culture  2 2 4 - 5  
Selective UV irradiation for culture purification 2 2 4 - 5 (via pilot scale up)  
Autolytic cell disruption for low-energy 
fractionation of wet microalgae biomass 
3 2 4 - 5 (via pilot scale up) 
Lipid extraction strategy to minimise solvent 3 2 – 3 4 – 5 (via pilot scale up)  
Multifunctional catalytic process with H2 looping 
route for conversion of algal lipids to HEFA-SPK  
4 1-2 4 – 5 (via pilot scale up) 
Algae-specific HEFA-SPK purification method  4 1 4  
Process for the conversion of microalgae biomass 
residue to TCR-HDO oil  
4 1 – 2 4 – 5 (via pilot scale up) 
Algae-specific TCR-HDO purification method  4 1 4  
[HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-02-08] [Development of microalgae fuel production and purification technologies for advanced aviation fuels] 
8 
Membrane system for CO 2 delivery. Recent studies have reported an 
alternative delivery system using non -porous membranes to increase 
CUE3,4,6,7. In these studies, a composite membrane with a thin dense core 
membrane layer was employed to enable the diffusion of individual CO 2 
molecules from vapour state (CO2(g)) into the aqueous microalgae suspension 
in bubbleless form (CO 2(aq))3, 7, 8. (Figure 1.2a) The approach was able to 
achieve >90% CUE and resulted in 15- 20x increase in biomass productivity 
compared to sparging. Membrane carbonation, however, is still in its infancy 
and has so far only been investigated for the delivery of pure CO 2 into 
microalgae culture. CO2 effluent from AD is a mixture comprised not only of 
CO2 (~85 vol%) but also other constituents (such as CH4) and will thus require 
a different membrane system to retard CH 4 permeation and selectively 
transmit CO29. The lack of optimisation of the membrane system and mass-
transfer models to describe the transport of CO 2 across the membrane and then diffusion into the microalgae cells 
have made it difficult to predict system performance and control CO2 flux in the system.  
Development of membrane system for efficient CO2 delivery to microalgae. In WP1 (Task 1.3), we will investigate 
the development of a novel membrane system for the efficient delivery of CO2 into microalgae culture. The system 
will be optimised in terms of membrane types, membrane configurations, CO2 partial pressure and pH of the solution 
to achieve high CUE (> 90%). The performance of the CO 2 delivery system will initially be assessed for aqueous 
solution (without microalgae) to understand the CO2 dissolution/equilibrium process.  In WP1 (Task 1.4), the CO2 
delivery system will be  integrated into a microalgae  cultivation on digestate, allowing for  complex interaction 
between CO2 delivery, CO2 uptake by photosynthesis, and nutrient utilisation by microalgae to be characterised. The 
development will leverage existing research on microalgal CO2 capture system at UCD for the project ‘EirAlgae’. 
Mass transfer model to describe the kinetics of carbon transport across the membrane and subsequent utilisation by 
microalgae will be developed based on first principles, validated using experimental data and solved using MATLAB 
to facilitate performance forecast during scale up.  
WP1: Autotrophic growth strategy on liquid digestate and direct capture of CO2 emission from AD 
Species selection. The three species we have selected, C. pyrenoidosa, A. protothecoides, N. salina, are well-known 
lipid accumulators, able to achieve a lipid content of up to 37 wt% of biomass when grown on nutrient-rich digestate. 
Findings obtained for N.salina are directly transferrable to other oleaginous species within the genus.  
Critical barrier to achieving low -cost cultivation for biofuels. Large-scale autotrophic cultivation of microalgae for 
biofuel application continues to suffer from a critical barrier: a) the high cost of commercial nutrients which in turn 
increases cultivation cost (OPEX) and limits biomass availability, and b) slow onset of lipid accumulation resulting 
in sub-optimal biomass lipid contents  which in turn increase subsequent costs of cultivation and biorefinery. 
Triglyceride accumulation is achieved under N starvation which forces cells to funnel photosynthetic carbon into 
lipid synthesis. Light attenuation due to self -shading effect  in algal culture  and CO2 mass-transfer limitation  
associated with sparging, however, can negatively affect photosynthetic rate and thus limit lipid accumulation.   
Table 1.2a: Performance of autotrophic cultivation of investigated species on digestate 
Utilisation of AD effluents and overview of process development. To address the high cost of nutrients, SusAlgaeFuel 
will examine the utilisation of both AD effluent streams to support microalgae growth: digestate’s liquid fraction (as 
N and P source ) and biogenic CO2 emission. The full scope of investigation on AD waste will adopt a multi-stage 
approach, with Task 1.1 and 1.2 (WP1) concentrating on cultivation strategies on digestate,  and Task 1.3 (WP1) 
developing a membrane system for CO2 delivery. Once the individual methods have been developed, they will both 
combined in single hybrid system to achieve both digestate utilisation and CO2 capture (Task 1.4, WP1). All initial 
technological development in WP1 will take place at bench scale ( and use commercial CO 2 supply as proxy for 
biogenic CO2 emission). In WP6, the hybrid system will be scaled up through the build and operation of pilot-scale 
infrastructure on AD operator site for which real biogenic CO2 emission from AD plant will be used for CO2 capture.  
 
6 DOI: 10.1016/j.algal.2020.102070  
7 DOI: 10.1016/j.memsci.2019.117389  
8 DOI: 10.1016/j.jcou.2019.06.008.   
9 DOI: 10.1016/j.biortech.2019.121804  
Species Dilution 
ratio  
Final biomass concentration             
(g biomass/L) 
Lipid content 
(wt% of dry biomass) 
Refs 
C. pyrenoidosa  1 – 8x 0.3 - 4.8 9.6 – 22 13, 16 
A. protothecoides 1 – 4x 0.5 - 3.5 22.2 - 36.3 11, 14, 15, 17 
N. salina 4 - 33x 0.7 - 0.9 20 – 35 12 
Figure 1.2a: Schematics of 
integrated membrane delivery / 
microalgae growth system 
[HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-02-08] [Development of microalgae fuel production and purification technologies for advanced aviation fuels] 
9 
Development of growth strategies on digestate.  Liquid digestate contains NH4+-N (139-3,456 mg/L), PO43--P (7-381 
mg/L), and micronutrients (596-5,905 mg/L)10 to support microalgae growth. Previous studies have shown that the 
three microalgae species investigated in the study can achieve high biomass concentration  when cultivated in 
autotrophic mode (up to 4.8 g biomass/L, Table 1.2a) on liquid digestate  with minimum nutrient 
supplementation11,12,13,14,15,16,17. Challenges associated with growing algae on liquid digestate include a) limited 
light penetration due to high turbidity and b) the presence of toxic components (e.g. heavy metals) and recalcitrant 
microorganisms from AD process exert ing inhibitory effect on microalgae growth, both of which are generally 
resolved in previous studies through significant dilution with water. In Task 1.1 and 1.2., we plan to overcome these 
challenges through extensive characterisation of digestate  using state-of-the-art methods (such as GC for Volatile 
Fatty Acids or VFA analysis and ICP-AES for heavy metals) before subjecting the digestate to a multi-step filtration 
process at different pore sizes18. The filtration process will allow for a) the removal of solids and microbes which  
consequentially reduce turbidity and b) reduction in the level of toxic components. We will then formulate growth 
medium at different dilution ratios for each species and test the effects on growth under lab-scale controlled 
conditions, with the objective to formulate optimal growth medium at minimum dilution ratio and nutrient 
supplementation. Nutrient mass balance will be carried out to determine level of required micronutrient 
supplementation. In addition, we will also track the assimilation of Volatile Fatty Acids (VFAs) during algae growth 
on digestate and their effect of the fatty acid profile of the biomass. If the filtration pre-treatment was found to be 
inadequate in reducing to toxicity level in the digestate, we will develop an appropriate detoxification strategy (e.g. 
fed-batch feeding) to make sure that the level of toxic contaminants remains below threshold at all times in the growth 
cycle. The development of growth strategies in WP1 is made possible only through the combination of A4F and 
UCD’s experience in autotrophic microalgal growth and BIAE’s expertise in AD characterisation. 
Combination of algal growth on digestate and direct CO2 capture. In WP1 (Task 1.4), the membrane system for CO2 
delivery will be integrated into microalgal growth strategies on digestate to attain simultaneous digestate treatment 
and CO2 capture. Efficient CO2 delivery by the membrane system is expected to intensify nutrient utilisation in the 
digestate-based medium, leading to rapid depletion of N in the medium  which then allows for early onset of lipid 
accumulation in the biomass. The level of CO 2 in the system will be carefully controlled through pH and light 
optimisation. The performance of the hybrid system will be optimised to maximise final biomass concentration (>3 
g biomass/L) and lipid accumulation (> 30wt% biomass) within short harvest cycle (7-14 days). 
Pilot scale-up of hybrid system on AD site to demonstrate digestate remediation and direct capture of CO2emission. 
In WP6 (Task 6.1), the hybrid system investigated in WP1, guided by techno-economic and LCA in WP5, will be 
scaled up to 1,000 L on partner BIAE site (AD operator) to demonstrate scalability. The facility will be the first pilot 
microalgal infrastructure reported to -date able to simultaneously remediate digestate and directly capture CO 2 
emission from biogas upgrading process. The membrane system developed in SusAlgaeFuel is a platform technology 
that can easily be adapted for microalgae-based CO2 capture system in other industries requiring CO2 capture from a 
flue gas (e.g. breweries). In Task 6.2, the pilot infrastructure will be operated and further optimised to maximise final 
biomass concentration & lipid content. Sufficient biomass will be generated for the production of 1 kg HEFA-SPK.  
WP2: In-line sensor to monitor bacterial population in culture  
Costly culture contamination. A necessity for process commercialisation is the identification of fast, precise, cost-
effective, and easy-to-apply methods to monitor the quality of the microalgal cultures. Microbial contamination 
in algal culture is a serious problem hampering the cultivation process, often resulting in culture crash and leading to 
considerable economic and time losses19. As such, early detection and culture monitoring are crucial. However, this 
is highly challenging due to the complexities of algae's interactions with other microorganisms.  
In-line culture monitoring system. On-line and in-line monitoring using Process Analytical Technology (PAT) is a 
promising tool 20, with high-selectivity and the capability of monitoring several analytes and parameters ( pH, 
dissolved oxygen, temperature, and biomass concentration, as well as certain pollutants which could jeopardize 
optimum conditions) simultaneously , for improving product quality, productivity, and process automation of 
microalgal culture and biorefinery. Moreover, as one of the classic indicators of low biomass quality is a high level 
of chlorophyll degradation leading to the formation of phaeophytins, chlorophyllides and pheaophorbides, a measure 
 
10 DOI: 10.1016/j.tibtech.2015.12.010  
11 DOI: 10.1016/j.biortech.2019.122445  
12 DOI: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2013.03.056  
13 DOI: 10.1016/j.biortech.2014.11.099  
14 DOI: 10.3390/atmos12091099 
15 DOI: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2004.01.013  
16 DOI: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2022.136177  
17 DOI: 10.1016/j.algal.2020.102129  
18 DOI: 10.1016/j.wasman.2020.08.037  
19 DOI: 10.1007/s00253-021-11396-7 
20 DOI: 10.1080/07388551.2017.1398132   
[HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-02-08] [Development of microalgae fuel production and purification technologies for advanced aviation fuels] 
10 
of chlorophyll degradation could be used as an indicator of cellular health and damage in photosynthetic organisms. 
Fluorescence-based techniques can be used to monitor chlorophyll content, providing an indication of algal health. 
Spectroscopic platform for bacterial analysis. In WP2 (Task 2.1), we will investigate the development of multirange 
spectroscopic methods for rapid and portable in-situ analysis and quantification of bacterial population dynamics in 
microalgae culture, enabling accurate monitoring of bacterial level in culture and the provision of early warning for 
catastrophic contamination level as well as effective bacterial management system. The approach that we will use is 
to leverage an innovative Multirange Spectroscopic Platform  (recently developed at IRIS ) whereby different 
spectroscopic PAT technologies have been engineered into a common framework to open up the possibility of 
tackling highly demanding monitoring applications by spectral data fusion in an effective and affordable way. This 
platform, called VISUM Fu sion, is a disruptive framework that delivers the following sensing techniques  (SWIR 
spectroscopy; NIR spectroscopy; VIS spectroscopy; Raman spectroscopy; and Fluorescence spectroscopy) through 
shared spectrometers (Raman uses a VIS or a NIR spectrometer and fluorescence a VIS spectrometer), as well as 
common illumination systems (VIS, NIR and SWIR can all use a common halogen lamp), and -in some cases- optical 
probes. This makes the platform ideally suited for experimental work related to the measurement o r detection 
of compounds at low concentration, often in complex matrices and with intrinsic barriers that do not match 
the ideal scenario of any of the traditional technologies , such as the bacterial/microalgae system we are 
investigating in SusAlgaeFuel. Through Fusion, having several techniques in a common platform not only allows us 
to use the optimum technique for each measurement requirement but also enables seamless data fusion, to obtain 
dramatic improvements in precision, accuracy, and limit of detection. To further extend the framework capabilities, 
Fusion could also fuse data provided by off -the-shelf compatible temperature and electrochemical sensors. The 
combination of PAT and machine learning techniques has the potential to move microalgae produ ction towards 
process automation through multivariate process control (MVPC) and software sensors trained on “big data”. 
WP2: Selective UV irradiation for culture purification 
Impact of light quality on algae growth and composition. Light quality can have an effect on microalgae growth e.g. 
(i) the ability to modulate Scenedesmus sp nutrient removal from wastewater using different ratios of red and blue  
light (ii) Spirulina (Arthrospira platensis) growth increase under red light . Light quality was also shown to impact 
biomass composition in Chlorella vulgaris, by changing the relative proportions of C16:0 and C18:321.  
Differential response between microalgae and bacteria cells to UV irradiation. Recent studies have show n that the 
application of UV-LED treatments (particularly UVB and UVC) can successfully inactivate bacteria in digestate22,23. 
UVB irradiance at 52.5 mJ.cm-2, for example, was found to be able to reduce the growth of several bacterial species 
by 36-58% in less than 1 minute, while UVC is routinely used in wastewater treatment (at multiple wavelengths), as 
a replacement for chlorine , to prevent bacteria reactivation. Interestingly, a study on phytoplankton inactivation 
highlighted the difference in bacteria and microalgae response  to UV irradiation, showing that the same treatment 
that inactivates bacteria is ineffective for microalgae.  Microalgae cells require a higher UV dose  (60 mJ cm−2) to 
reduce the initial concentration by 4 orders of magnitude (D4)  compared to faecal bacteria and marine bacteria (19 
and 44 mJ cm −2) 5,23 . These differences in UV acclimatisation, if applied at the correct dosage, sequences, and 
wavelength, can be exploited as a low-cost means to purify culture during cultivation (particularly on waste products), 
selectively deactivating bacteria, while boosting the growth/lipid composition of microalgae cells. A more target ed 
UV approach can even potentially distinguish harmful bacteria from beneficial bacteria, allowing for adaptive growth 
that favours the proliferation of beneficial bacteria to symbiotically interact with microalgae cells.  
Development of UV irradiation system for culture purification and lipid induction. In WP2 (Task 2.2), we plan to 
develop a 2- stage illumination system where we first expose the  liquid digestate growth medium (before algal 
inoculation) to UV irradiation to inactivate bacteria in the medium (as a supplement to the filtration system developed 
in Task 1.1) and then subject microalgae culture grown on the sterilised digestate to a range light quality sources (e.g. 
artificial day light, standard white light) and UV irradiation under different wavelength ranges and regimens (e.g. 
red/blue light supplementation, continuous and pulsed) as in-line purification method to maintain low bacterial count 
arising from native bacteria in the algal inoculum , while boosting algal growth and lipid accumulation for biofuel 
production. The system thus has a dual purpose, enabling the sterilisation of bacteria on the digestate in the first stage 
while suppressing the growth of native bacteria present in the  original/inoculum culture, and enhancing microalgae 
growth in the second stage. In WP2 (Task 2.3), we plan to take the system one step further. We will sequence native 
bacteria in each species (via 16S rDNA) and study their symbiosis through re-inoculation in axenic culture. Once a 
set of beneficial bacteria have been identified, the parameters of the UV irradiation system will be adapted to favour 
the growth of beneficial bacteria (over harmful ones), enabling further improvement in algal growth. WP2 will 
contribute novel science in algal-bacterial interaction and directed adaptation.  
WP3: Autolytic cell disruption for low-energy fractionation of wet microalgae biomass   
 
21 DOI: 10.1016/j.biortech.2014.03.092  
22 DOI: 10.1111/1541-4337.12645.  
23 DOI: 10.1016/j.watres.2019.114875  
[HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-02-08] [Development of microalgae fuel production and purification technologies for advanced aviation fuels] 
11 
The ‘correct’ water concentration of biomass for  fuel production from algae:  Biomass drying must absolutely be 
avoided when processing algae biomass for fuel production, with the amount of energy needed to completely remove 
water from algal concentrate  (10.9 MJ/kg biomass) exceeding the full lipid- energy potential of the biomass (10.1 
MJ/kg biomass at 30 wt% lipids). Dilute culture, however, must also be dewatered in order to avoid energy penalty 
of processing large water volume. The ideal biomass state is as slurry or concentrate at 100 – 200 g biomass/kg slurry. 
Wet processing route, however, leads to unique challenges associated with cell disruption and product liberation. 
Energy-intensive c ell disruption . Microalgal 
products, including lipids for HEFA conversion, 
are intracellular in nature, encapsulated within the 
biomass by multilayered cell walls which confer the 
cells with formidable defence against external 
processing (such as in the case of 
Nannochloropsis). Microalgal slurry thus needs to 
be subjected to external cell disruption to liberate 
products for subsequent conversion. Enzymatic 
disruption is simply too expensive for low -value 
products (such as fuel). Chemical treatments using 
acids are possible options, but they often need to be 
applied at extreme pH and temperature  (> 150℃) 
leading to degradation. Mechanical methods  (such as bead milling) are effective and rapid, but generally accrue 
significant energy demand (Table 1.2b). Our calculations suggest that, even in optimistic scenario, the energy spent 
for cell disruption alone (using HPH) can account for up 25% of the total energy demand of algal biofuel production, 
often contributing to negative energy balance and an Energy Return on Investment ( EROI) value < 1 (Section 2.1 
EO2 for calculations). For fuel production, a crucial criterion for the choice of cell disruption is the capacity to be 
deployed in an industrial scale at both reasonable cost and low energy requirements.   
Autolysis as means to reduce the energy demand of cell disruption . Autolysis is a self -decomposition process 
whereby cells use their own endogenous (or internal) enzymes to degrade/weaken their cell walls, thus reducing the 
amount/intensity of external process that needs to be applied in order to achieve complete cell disruption.  The 
underlying mechanism that drives autolysis is not well understood and, until recently, there were no known methods 
to induce autolysis in microalgae slurries suitable for large-scale processing. PI Halim (UCD) recently reported a 
method to induce autolysis in dense microalgae (Nannochloropsis) slurries under scalable conditions without the 
need of chemical agents32. The method involved incubating concentrated slurries under dark and anaerobic incubation 
at mildly elevated temperature (37℃) for 8-12 h. During the treatment, Nannochloropsis cells were found to activate 
self-fermentation pathways which thinned their cell walls by 40- 50%, rendering the biomass more susceptible to 
subsequent externally applied cell disruption (e.g. by HPH) and eventually leading to 50% reduction in energy 
demand for attainment of complete cell disruption  (from 0.7 to 0.35 MJ/kg biomass) . Despite the groundbreaking 
potential of the treatment, we have not investigated autolysis on other species or with combination of other disruption.  
Low-energy biorefinery fractionation based on autolysis. In WP3 (Task 3.1), we will leverage PI Halim’s discovery 
in autolysis to develop a l ow-energy cascading biorefinery for the fractionation of microalgae biomass (as slurry) 
into HEFA-convertible lipids, protein serum and biomass residue. We will investigate the co upling of autolytic 
incubation with a range of mechanical and chemical disruption steps. By getting the cells to weaken themselves prior 
to externally applied cell disruption, we expect to be able to achieve complete disruption at milder operating 
conditions (i.e. lower pres sure for HPH or lower speed for HSM), thus reducing the energy footprint and cost 
requirement for cell disruption. Since it will be unrealistic to screen every type of disruption, we will limit our 
investigation to processes known for having relatively low energy demand to start with (Table 1.2b): PEF, HPH and 
HSM. These selections are well aligned with KIT’s findings as biorefinery WP leader in SABANA project, which 
shows bead milling, microwave and ultrasound to have an energy demand as high as 10x that of PEF and HPH. The 
combination of autolysis with dilute acid treatment will also be investigated because of its potential to attain very 
low energy demand as long as autolysis pre-treatment successfully reduced the pH requirements.  
 
24 DOI: 10.1016/j.algal.2023.103056.  
25 DOI: 10.3390/pr9020369 
26 DOI: 10.1016/j.procbio.2022.06.014  
27 DOI: 10.1016/j.biortech.2017.05.012  
28 DOI: 10.3390/fermentation8070301 
29 DOI: 10.1016/j.biortech.2015.12.012  
30 DOI: 10.1016/j.algal.2017.03.024  
31 DOI: 10.1016/j.renene.2019.10.133  
32 DOI: 10.1039/C8GC03186J  
Common Mechanical Cell 
Disruption 
Energy 
demand 
(kWh/kg 
biomass) 
References 
Ultrasonic 50-206.7 24 
Microwave 1-117 25,26 
Bead milling 0.4-8.9 27,28 
Pulsed Electric Field (PEF) 0.5-2.5 29,30 
High-Pressure Homogenisation 
(HPH) 
0.3-5.5 27, 28 
High Shear Mixing (HSM) 0.4-1.4 31 
Table 1.2b: Energy demand for mechanical disruption 
[HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-02-08] [Development of microalgae fuel production and purification technologies for advanced aviation fuels] 
12 
Energy target and process optimisation: Our target is to develop a biorefinery system capable of achieving 100% 
disruption (and thus complete fractionation) at energy demand of < 0.3 kWh/kg biomass (or 1 MJ/kg biomass). By 
capping the energy demand of cell disruption at 0.3 kWh/kg biomass, our calculations show that we will reduce the 
OPEX of cell disruption from ca. 1.61 to 0.56 $/kg HEFA, thus contributing to achieving our overall ambition of a  
HEFA cost of 6.30 $/kg ( Section 2.1 EO2). Even though this target is at the lower range of cell disruption energy 
demand, it is not unrealistic and can likely be achieved through pa rametric optimisation of the combined autolysis 
and mechanical/chemical disruption biorefinery, especially given that UCD has previously demonstrated the low 
energy demand of their autolysis HPH process and KIT has shown that they can reduce the energy con sumption of 
PEF to 1- 2 MJ/kg biomass even without autolysis  coupling. The biorefinery developed in WP 3 will be the first 
reported cell disruption that has specifically been tailored to process wet biomass cultivated on digestate, enabling 
novel development of sciences in the impact of growth conditions on cell-wall configurations and disruption.  
Protein release:  As part of the cascading biorefinery development, we will also analyse the amount of protein released 
by the biomass into the medium after cell disruption and phase separation as a separate product stream.  
WP3: Lipid extraction strategy that allows for maximum solvent recycling and minimises solvent cost   
High solvent demand during lipid extraction. Lipid extraction is a critical bottleneck in microalgae fuel production, 
requiring substantial solvent usage (or solvent-to-biomass ratio) ranging from 3 to 200 L/kg biomass  (Table 1.2c). 
Many studies have selected their solvent usage arbitrarily, based on analytical amounts needed for total lipid 
extraction rather than consideration of scalability, thus contributing to the significant range observed in Table 1.2c. 
High solvent usage exerts double negative effect on OPEX, firstly through the direct cost of solvent  purchase and, 
secondly, through the high energy cost associated with solvent evaporation (to separate solvent from extracted lipids). 
A critical strategy t o reduce solvent usage is through effective solvent recycling. This, however, requires careful 
consideration to the solvent choice, as wet processing route entails complex interactions between water and solvents.   
Table 1.2c: Solvent usage for lipid extraction 
System  Solvents  Solvent usage [L/kg 
biomass]  
References  
Monophasic  Chloroform:methanol (2:1), ethanol, 
hexane:methanol, hexane:ethanol, hexane: IPA (3:2) 
3 – 200 33,34,35,36, 
37,38,39,40, 
41   Biphasic Hexane 1.5 – 60 
Solvent selection. Solvent forms complex interaction with water molecules surrounding the cells  during lipid 
extraction from wet biomass. Solvent system can be divided into two categories: the ‘monophasic’ approach in which 
the solvents are perfectly miscible with water so that the whole extraction mixture forms a single phase and the 
‘biphasic’ approach where non-water-miscible solvent i.e. a non- polar solvent (e.g. hexane, heptane) or solvent of 
very low polarity ( ethyl-acetate, methyl tert-butyl ether MTBE) is used and the extraction mixture retains separate 
water and solvent phases. The monophasic approach generally uses a polar solvent which is then difficult to separate 
from water after extraction42. In the worst case, the solvent can form an azeotrope with the water ( in the case of 
ethanol), which considerably increases the separation costs  through fractional distillation. The difficulty associated 
with separating monophasic solvent from water means that solvent recycling will be very energy intensive , making 
it nearly impossible to effectively recycle solvent and thus to minimise solvent usage. On the other hand,  for the 
biphasic approach, low-polar solvents do not form a single phase with water and can thus be separated from water in 
the slurry using a less energy -intensive phase separation step (e.g. centrifugation), facilitating effective solvent 
recycling and reduction in solvent usage. Additionally, biphasic solvent systems are more selective towards neutral 
lipids, the form desirable for HEFA conversion, preventing co-extraction of polar lipids and proteins.  
Development of  lipids extraction using biphasic solvent and solvent usage target. In WP 3 (Task 3.2), we will 
investigate non-polar or low-polar solvent systems for biphasic extraction of lipids from treated/disrupted algae slurry 
obtained in Task 3.1. We will first screen different solvents for the three investigated species, determining  which 
solvent or solvent system resulted in maximum lipid recovery  from treated/disrupted microalgal slurry . Once the 
solvent system has been selected, we will systematically reduce the solvent  usage for the specific species through 
parametric optimisation  of the extraction step (e.g. agitation level, duration, number of equilibrium stages)  and 
gradual increase in biomass concentration (from 100 to 200 g biomass / kg slurry)  with the goal of extracting a 
 
33 DOI: 10.1016/j.rser.2018.05.012   
34 DOI: 10.1021/acs.jafc.5b00241  
35 DOI: 10.1016/j.algal.2016.11.005  
36 DOI: 10.1016/j.biombioe.2011.09.003  
37 DOI: 10.3844/ajbbsp.2011.70.73  
38 DOI: 10.1186/1475-2859-13-14  
39 DOI: 10.1007/s10811-013-0189-y    
40 DOI: 10.1007/s10811-020-02037-z  
41 DOI: 10.1016/j.biortech.2015.03.126.  
42 DOI: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2016.06.002  
[HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-02-08] [Development of microalgae fuel production and purification technologies for advanced aviation fuels] 
13 
minimum of 80% available lipids. In Section 2.2, w e have calculated the cost of algal HEFA based on an average  
solvent usage of 15 L/kg biomass and fuel target of 10 Mt/year. The cost of lipid extraction step was found to be 
2.4$/kg HEFA, while the energy demand of lipid extraction was 20.6 kWh/kg HEFA, largely driven by the need for 
solvent evaporation . Our aim in WP3 is thus to cut down solvent usage to 3.5 L/kg biomass, enabling OPEX 
associated with lipid extraction to be reduced to 0.57$/kg HEFA and energy demand  of solvent evaporation to  
decrease to 6.51 kWh/kg HEFA . This amount of reduction is needed in order to achieve our ambition of  a HEFA 
cost of 6.30 $/kg and favourable EROI (>1). This target seems reasonable since both KIT and UCD have previously 
demonstrated that hexane extraction from PEF -treated A. prototheorids  wet biomass and HPH -treated wet  
Nannochloropsis biomass32 respectively can achieve 80% lipid extraction at 2-4 L solvent /kg biomass. 
Emulsion mitigation  to enable solvent recycling . In theory biphasic solvent system should lead to facile phase 
separation of solvents from water  (via centrifugation) , enabling effective recycling  and reduced solvent usage . 
However, in reality, amphiphilic interactions between solvents, water and extracted lipids can often result in the 
formation of stable emulsion which traps solvents and leads to solvent losses. We have reported on this before for 
the hexane system32 but literature remains scarce and data from soybean processing industry suggests that solvent 
losses between 0.05 and 0.3% of solvent is expected. The phenomenon, however, is difficult to observe and measure 
at bench scale. For this reason, once extraction conditions have been optimised at bench scale, we will test the best 
extraction systems at intermediate scale  (ca. 300 g of wet slurry)  and measure the level of emulsion formation. 
Methods to minimise emulsions will be investigated (e.g. pH adjustment) to achieve 95% solvent recycling. 
Pilot scale -up of autolysis-based cell disruption and b iphasic lipid extraction . In WP6 (Task 6.1), optimum cell 
disruption and lipid extraction process es (for the selected species) as discovered in WP3 , and guided by techno-
economic and LCA in WP5, will be scaled up on partner BIAE site. In WP6 (Task 6.2), the pilot -scale biorefinery 
will be operated for the extraction of sufficient lipids for conversion to 1 kg of HEFA-SPK 
WP4: Multifunctional catalytic process for hydrotreatment conversion of microalgal lipids to HEFA-SPK   
Lack of optimum catalyst for algal HEFA conversion. Algae oils are well positioned as HEFA feedstock thanks to 
the high content of high-carbon-length lipids suitable for HEFA conversion. However, implementation of algal oils 
in commercial HEFA installations has been shown to lead to accelerated catalyst deactivation and low yields of SPK-
type alkanes; this is likely attributed to the lack of reactivity of oleic acid (C18:1), a major fatty acid in algal lipids, 
to Pt-based catalysts used in the conversion process43.  
Development of algae-specific catalysts and HEFA-conversion process. In WP4 (Task 4.1), we aim to achieve high 
HEFA conversion from algal lipids by developing novel multifunctional catalysts (based on transition metals) 
specifically tailored to handle alga l lipid compositions. We will tap into UCAM’s extensive experience in fuel 
catalyst development to first benchmark a two -step and single-step HEFA process using current understanding of 
hydroprocessing routes with hydrodeoxidation, isomerisation, hydrocracking reactions based on common catalysts; 
then, we will develop new, algal-specific catalysts, designed to work with high content of oleic acid in algal lipids. 
We will control the oxygen- removing mechanism by using transition metal catalysts (Ni, Mo, Co, Cu, Fe)  and 
promote selective hydro -isomerisation with 
mild/medium-acidic supports (zeolites, alumina) . 
Those two steps will be investigated using separate, 
single-function catalysts, optimised for their sp ecific 
roles, and a combined bi -functional catalyst for a one -
step HEFA treatment. Our goal is to significantly 
improve the yields of SPK components, with an 
overarching ambition to characterise algae lipid- to-HEFA conversion process and understand the cat alytic 
mechanisms that pro  mote the production of SPK -desired C9 -C15 alkanes from algal feedstocks. This will be 
achieved by analysing high-granularity experimental data obtained for varied feedstock composition/catalyst/support 
combinations in single- and two-step process approach.  
Cost reduction during HEFA conversion. In addition to algae -specific catalyst development to facilitate high 
conversion, in WP4 (Task 4.2), we will be investigating innovative ways to reduce the cost associated with HEFA 
conversion process from algal lipid feedstock. In this case, we will develop a chemical looping system that allows 
for the production of green H
2 from the HEFA waste stream containing propane at ~500ºC and the recycling of the 
generated H 2 for chemical rea ction (Figure 1.2b ). Hydrogen is the key component in HEFA (required for 
hydrooxidation and hydrocracking), but most H2 for the process is currently produced from energy-intensive steam-
reforming, thus increasing the energy requirements and OPEX of HEFA conversion. Under the proposed system, 
UCAM will design a new, chemical looping reactor, filled with inexpensive Fe -based material, that will react with 
waste propane producing water and CO2. The H2-production step will be conducted by regenerating the Fe-material 
 
43 DOI: 10.1016/j.renene.2016.05.075  
Figure 1.2b: HEFA route loop modification 

[HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-02-08] [Development of microalgae fuel production and purification technologies for advanced aviation fuels] 
14 
with water, leading to H 2O splitting in a thermochemical reaction. Adding in- house generation of H2 will improve 
the economics of HEFA production; while contributing transferable innovation in HEFA processing beyond algae.  
Pilot scale-up. The investigated route will be scaled up and validated in WP6 (Task 6.3) to produce 1 kg of HEFA. 
WP4: Process for the conversion of biomass residue to TCR-HDO fuel   
TCR-HDO as promising fuel conversion pathway. Cellulosic biomass can be converted to fuel intermediates through 
pyrolysis, hydrothermal technologies or gasification routes. However, there are still to-date no direct commercially 
mature routes for the application of pyrolysis oil (after modification) in fuel applications.  Pyrolysis generates a dark 
brown oil consisting of 100+  different compounds (including oxygenated compounds , nitrogenated cyclic 
compounds, and sulfonated compounds) which lack thermal stability and are thus unsuitable for engine application. 
TCR, on the other hand,  produces a thermal ly stable oil that can be subjected to subsequent hydrogenation step 
(HDO) for the removal of hetero atoms O, N, S  (in form as H2O, H2S, NH3 ) and upgrade to saturated olefines. In 
WP4, we will investigate the full TCR-HDO pathway as a possible route for the production of hydrocarbons (diesel, 
kerosene and petrol fraction) from deproteinated and delipidated microalgae biomass residue. Even though TCR 
reforming is a relatively mature technology (TCR = 7), the subsequent hydrogenation step needed to upgrade the oil 
to petrol/diesel equivalence remains at a lower TRL level (TRL = 4). In the context of microalgae, no TCR 
investigation has ever been carried out on microalgae biomass or residue, underscoring the project novelty. 
Development of TC R-HDO for microalgae residue.  By investigating TRC+HDO conversion of algae biomass 
residue, additional energy from microalgae biomass can be generated beyond lipid extraction and conversion. This 
will increase the overall energy efficiency of SusAlgaeFuel process. In WP4  (Task 4.4), Fraunhofer UMSICHT 
will adapt their patented TCR -HDO flagship process (WO2015158732A1) previously developed for other 
biomass (e.g. sewage sludge) for algal application. A tailored hydrotreatment step (HDO) for algal biomass will be 
developed through optimisation of catalyst composition, temperature, pressure and gas velocity in order to maximise 
oil production (and minimise syngas and char production). The syngas generated from TCR process will be internally 
recycled as H
2 source for the hydrotreatment step, thus reducing overall conversion cost. 
WP4: Purification of fuel molecules for the production of high-quality HEFA-SPK and TCR-HDO fuels 
Development of purification methods for algae fuels. Sustainable aviation fuels must fulfil ASTM standards, which 
condition the minimum physical and chemical properties required to ensure safe operations during flight. Fuel 
properties directly correlate to their composition and the level of common impurities (usually water, metals and 
sulphur), the levels of which can in turn be controlled through refining and purification steps. The process needed to 
upgrade algal derived SAFs to achieve aviation specifications has never been previously reported. In WP4 (Task 4.3 
and Task 4.5) , we will leverage UCAM’s and UMSICHT’s extensive experience and infrastructure in fuel 
development and upgrading to investigate the combination of possible fuel upgrading steps that a re most optimal 
for the algal -derived SAFs. Separate purification pathways will be investigated for HEFA -SPK (by UCAM) and 
TCR-HDO oil (by UMSICHT) to facilitate the development of customized purification for the specific fuel types. 
Our overarching goal for the purification process is to minimise the intensity and cost requirements of unit operations. 
This will be achieved by first correlating the key physical properties of the fuel (thermal stability, volatility) with 
carbon distribution in the fuel components and the content of inorganics. Then, we will use the correlation to define 
the minimum set of purification and refining steps, assessing possible experimental combinations. Dedicated 
microfluidic devices will be designed and built as necessary in order to reduce the amount of requisite fuel feedstock 
for purification steps (in the case that a large number of combinations needs to be investigated and we have limited 
fuel availability in the early phase of the project). For HEFA -SPK, the purification/upgrading strategies to be 
investigated include caustic treatment, filtration, and distillation. For TCR -HDO, we will investigate distillation, 
polar solvent extraction, and aromatic compound enrichment. Blending and additives will be considered if the 
proposed purification strategies appear insufficient. We will then create a decision toolbox (fed to WP5), connecting 
the purification steps with the achieved fuel composition and energy requirements.  
WP5: Process simulations, techno-economic and social life-cycle analysis 
Holistic techno-economic and life-cycle analysis. The integration tasks foreseen here are instrumental in developing 
a step-change solution for producing sustainable fuels from microalgae . From the start of the project, experimental 
research on algae cultivation, culture purification, biorefinery fractionation, and fuel production and purification will 
be supported by simulations, techno- economic and environmental assessments. All proposed processes will be 
studied separately in bench-scale setups before being integrated using simulations in a single process train, looking 
for synergies in process integrations (e.g. water recycling in biorefinery, heat transfer in HEFA reactions) for large-
scale production under realistic set of process conditions. The design of the optimised configuration will be presented 
in a virtual biorefinery plant with the capacity of 10,000,000 kg SAF p.a. (WP5, Task 5.1 ), with the process and 
material flowsheeting directly linked with the environmental assessments using Life Cycle Analysis (LCA) (WP 5, 
Task 5.2). Uncertainty analysis and techno- economic assessment will be carried out in WP 5 to identify major cost 
drivers and assess commercial scalability  of the proposed approaches. The LCA modelling in WP 5 will require a 
number of new models to be developed for assessing the carbon and environmental footprint of SusAlgaeFuel 
[HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-02-08] [Development of microalgae fuel production and purification technologies for advanced aviation fuels] 
15 
methods. The techno-economic and LCA results will be combined with experimental results from WPs1-4 to inform 
the SusAlgaeFuel team of the most optimal option for scaling up during pilot production in WP6.  
Social analysis. Social LCA (sLCA) will also be carried out in WP5 (Task 5.2) to explore the social impacts of the 
developed products/ technologies along the life cycle  and derive holistic multi-actor assessments of process 
sustainability. We will identify the main social impact categories (e.g working conditions, health and safety impact), 
the key stakeholder groups that will be affected by value chain (e.g. employees, raw-material suppliers, people who 
live near AD plant) and evaluate the impact levels for each category/stakeholder group. The techno-economic, LCA 
and sLCA results from WP5 will be used to propose policy recommendations and business model in WP7. 
1.2.2 Compliance with ‘Do No Significant Harm’ DNSH Principles 
SusAlgaeFuel will comply with the DNSH Principles  and align itself with  the targets and mandates of major EU 
policies pertaining to the green bioeconomy (e.g. European Green Deal, Farm to Fork), waste management (e.g. EU 
2019 New Waste Framework Directive ), climate protection and renewable energy (e.g. RED II, Fit for 55 ) by: a) 
exploiting waste products from AD as nutrients for microalgae cultivation , thus providing bioenergy sectors with a 
more sustainable (and potentially more commercially viable) means of valorising their waste products  while 
complying with EU-wide directives in waste management (e.g. Nitrate Vulnerable Zone legislation for AD)18 and b) 
developing wet algal biorefinery which bypasses the need for drying and reduces GHG emission.    
1.2.3. National and International Research Activities 
SusAlgaeFuel will build on the technical  know-hows and infrastructure acquired by project partners through 
participation/coordination in ongoing/completed EU and national research programmes (Table 1.2d).  
Table 1.2d: Synergies of SusAlgaeFuel with other EU and national projects involving consortium partners  
Project Summary and Synergies with SusAlgaeFuel 
MICRO-LYSIS: ‘Cell-Wall Autolysis for the 
Scalable Fractionation of Microalgae into Biofuels 
and Novel Food Products’, UCD, Irish Research 
Council, ongoing, 2022-2026  
Micro-lysis plans to exploits autolysis for scalable and low-energy 
fractionation of several industria lly important microalgae species 
for food and fuel applications. Autolytic incubation will be 
investigated in WP2.  
EIRALGAE: ‘Exploring the synergies between 
anaerobic digestion and microalgae for the 
development of energy independence, food-security 
and carbon neutrality in Ireland’, UCD, Sustainable 
Energy Authority of Ireland, ongoing, 2023 – 2027.  
EirAlgae aims to develop s calable biorefinery processes using 
Nannochloropsis to valorise AD waste into ω-3 PUFAs and protein 
for feed application. UCD will build on their knowledge of  
autotrophic growth on digestate and CO2 capture system in WP1. 
BIOFAT: ‘Biofuels from Algae Technologies’, 
A4F, FP7-ENERGY, completed, 2011-2016 
A4F coordinated demonstration project with a farming area of 10-
ha, gaining knowledge of autotrophic growth for WP1. 
BioSPRINT. ‘ Improve biorefinery operations 
through process int ensification and new end 
products’, IRIS, H2020, BBI, Ongoing.  
In this project, IRIS is  developing a photonics -based monitoring 
solution to analyse compounds in the biomass residue  from sugar 
biorefinery; this knowledge will be employed in WP2. 
SABANA: ‘ Sustainable Algae Biorefinery for 
Agriculture and Aquaculture’, KIT, H2020, 
completed, 2016-2021 
SABANA compared conventional microalgae pretreatment 
technologies (HPH, bead milling) to PEF treatment. KIT has gained 
significant experience in microalgae processing to advance WP3. 
TOSYNFUEL: ‘ Turning sewage sludge  
into fuels and hydrogen’, UMSICHT, Horizon 
2020, completed, 2017-2022. 
UMSICHT coordinated TOSYNFUEL to demonstrate the 
conversion of sewage sludge to petrol using TCR. Methodologies 
and infrastructure will be transferred to WP4 & WP6.  
1.2.4. Interdisciplinary Nature  
SusAlgaeFuel will adopt a multidisciplinary approach in the intersection of microalgae biotechnology, bioprocess 
engineering/biorefinery, fuel conversion, economic, sustainability, and policy analysis. Indeed, the consortium will 
collaborate together in an interdisciplinary approach, converging knowledge clusters from the following fields across 
the work plan:  microalgae, wastewater treatment, CO 2 capture, AD system (UCD, A4F, BIAE) for microalgae 
cultivation work (WP1); microalgae and fundamental biology, sensor development, machine learning (IRIS, UCD) 
for the real -time monitoring of bacterial contamination (WP2); bioprocess engineering, biorefinery system (KIT, 
UCD) for the biomass purification work (WP3); fuel engineering/chemical engineering, fuel chem istry, meta(data) 
analysis (UCAM, UMSICHT)  for the fuel conversion/purification work (WP4); process simulations, LCA and 
sustainability (SFS, UCD) for the process integration (WP5); microalgae, bioprocess engineering, fuel engineering, 
fuel testing, digita l twins (BIAE, A4F, UCD, UCAM, UMSICHT, IRIS) for the pilot scale up work (WP6), and 
finally expertise in science dissemination, research commercialisation, policy analysis (ESCI, UCD, SFS) necessary 
for the communication, exploitation and policy efforts that will be performed in WP7..   
1.2.5. Social Sciences and Humanities Aspects  
Our methodology integrates social sciences and humanities (SSH) aspects, whereby the technology development will 
be complemented with techno -economic and life -cycle analyses to assess  scalability from economic, social and 
environmental perspectives and identify process improvements . As such, economic, environmental and social 
experts from UCD and SFS will work together to conduct a rigorous evaluation of the techno-economic and socio-
environmental dimension of the results generated from the project and its impacts for the proposed value chain  
[HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-02-08] [Development of microalgae fuel production and purification technologies for advanced aviation fuels] 
16 
(WP5), and the conclusions will in turn inform the technical  and scientific R&D work in a circular loop to enable 
process improvements and iterative optimisations. Importantly, the social LCA (sLCA) that will be carried out to 
explore the social impacts and sustainability of the developed products and technologies, and their actual and 
potential positive as well as negative impacts along the life cycle, is still relatively novel but is becoming increasingly 
important in holistic sustainability assessments.  In WP7, business expertise will be mobilised to develop a 
business/commercialisation model to map out potential exploitation pathways for different project results by the 
relevant stakeholders using methodologies such as one-to-one interviews and consultation with industry stakeholders 
in microalgae, AD, fuel production, aviation, and policy-making beyond the current consortium partners and lead to 
a joint publication outlining the roadmap for adoption by each of the relevant stakeholders (D7.4). During this 
process, GDPR -compliant data -collection principles on ques tionnaires preparation and unbiased interview 
techniques will be strictly implemented. Marketing and communications experts will also work with the consortium 
in the most effective way of engaging with, mobilising, and securing the buy-in of stakeholders.    
1.2.6. Gender Dimension  
The direct outcome of SusAlgaeFuel will be a more sustainable and cost -competitive algae biofuel. While this 
outcome will apply to both males and females indiscriminately, there are gender dimensions that impact various 
aspects of the technology and its implementation. Efforts to promote gender diversity in our own team can lead to 
a broader range of perspectives and innovative solutions. In our engagements beyond the consortium, in our one-to-
one interviews and consultation with industry stakeholders , we will aim to secure inclusive and gender balanced 
participation to incorporate unbiased gender perspective in industry leadership, policy decision making, consumer 
perceptions and preferences. SusAlgaeFuel is also committed to championing women in STEM and STEM research. 
To this end, we will conduct a Women -in-Science Campaign as part of our communication actions ( Section 2.2). 
In this campaign, ESCI  will interview the women in our consortium  and provide them with a platform to tell the 
journey of their scientific careers and how they overcome societal challenges. The interview will then be featured in 
SusAlgaeFuel dedicated social-media channels to inspire young adults to pursue a career in science.   
1.2.7. Open Science 
SusAlgaeFuel will develop a proactive Open-Science approach to promote the accessibility and transparency. 
Databases and publications will be preserved in open -access repositories: After appropriate IP protection is in 
place, results will be published in international open access journals via the Green Open-Access route. They will also 
be archived and made available in trusted open-access repositories (e.g., Open Research Europe and DRYAD Digital 
Repository). This practice will ensure the latest discoveries can be searched by other actors in relevant fields. 
Registered pre-prints will be employed to ensure the early and open sharing of the research.  Data sets, supporting 
data, experimental materials, methods , and design will also be archived together with written reports, allowing 
information to be re-analysed, replicated, and reused. Research output management Project outputs will be made 
accessible to the public through a range of activities: the project’s website and social-media (Section 2.2). The Data 
Management Plan (Section 1.2.8) provides details on how research outputs will be managed through FAIR principles.  
1.2.8. Data Management  
Overview: Data management is an integral part of project implementation. All data management practice will strictly 
adhere to the FAIR principles to ensure that the data are Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable. Moreover, 
a full Data Management Plan (D8.1) will be delivered within the first six months of the project.  
Types of data/ research output, their findability, and accessibility:  Project data/research outputs are comprised 
of quantitative and qualitative data, generated through both primary (i.e. experimental results) and secondary (i.e. 
policy assessment) research. Data will be deposited into open access repositories such as Dryad Digital Repository, 
which will be findable using keyword selection, versioning, and a standard identification mechanism (i.e., Digital 
Object Identifiers). Deposition of commercially sensitive data will not occur until the necessary steps to protect the 
commercial values of the data have been undertaken. Data sharing with institutions/researchers external to the 
consortium may occur on an ad-hoc basis at the discretion of SusAlgaeFuel’s Executive Board.  
Interoperability and Reusability of data/research outputs: Data and metadata produced during the project will be 
made interoperable through the use of a formal, accessible, widely -used, and broadly applicable vocabulary for all 
research outputs. Data files will be delivered in a non -proprietary open fi le format dictated by the Dryad Digital 
Repository (i.e. tabular data stored as Comma- separated values (CSV) and images as .jpeg) accompanied by a 
README file providing a clear and concise description of all components of the data set and software used to ensure 
it is reusable. Where necessary, data and metadata will include qualified references to other data/metadata. For 
datasets shared on public repositories, we will apply a Creative Commons Attribution license to ensure reusability. 
Curation and storage /preservation costs: In order to minimise the risk of confidentiality breach: data storage, 
handling and retention will be carefully planned by each partner in compliance with the legislation on data protection 
(GDPR) within their member state. Prior to curation in open-access repositories, research outputs from all WPs will 
first be catalogued and deposited into the secure UCD -run Google-drive servers and held as temporary soft copies 
by each partner to assure data preservation. After project completion, all research outputs will be securely stored for 
at least 10 years in secure and dedicated open-access repositories (managed by UCD). 
[HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-02-08] [Development of microalgae fuel production and purification technologies for advanced aviation fuels] 
17 
 #§CON-MET-CM§# #§COM-PLE-CP§# #§REL-EVA-RE§#  
2. IMPACT #@IMP-ACT-IA@# 
2.1. Project’s Pathways towards Impact                                                                                                      
2.1.1. Unique Contributions towards Expected Outcomes and Wider Impacts 
SusAlgaeFuel combines a holistic and innovative approach for microalgae Sustainable Aviation Fuels (SAFs) 
covering: a) direct capture of CO 2 emissions from biogas upgrading and utilisation of waste digestate as a widely 
available and low-cost nutrient source to support algae growth; b) novel in- line PAT complemented with machine 
learning and selective UV irradiation to monitor and purify bacterial contamination from algae culture; c) cascading 
biorefinery that relies on autolysis (self-disruption) and maximises solvent recycling in order to fractionate biomass 
into lipids, protein serum and cellulose-rich biomass residue at low energy and solvent requirements; and d) algae -
specific thermocatalytic pathways for the efficient conversion of algae -lipids to HEFA-SPK and residue to bio- oil, 
followed by a range of purification methods for fuel refinement to meet aviation standards and certification.  
This innovation has been carefully designed address the HORIZON- CL5-2023-D3-02-09 Call comprehensibly. 
Through the succession of innovative ideas bringing about the transformative step-change in each process unit across 
the whole algae- to-fuel process train,  SusAlgaeFuel is positioned to concretely deliver 3 out of 6 call-specific 
Expected Outcomes (EO1, EO2, EO4).  
EO1 Availability of disruptive sustainable renewable fuel technologies in order to accelerate the replacement 
of fossil-based energy technologies in aviation and/or shipping. 
Through innovative strategies SusAlgaeFuel will bring to market the first certified algal SAF  to propel the shift 
from fossil-based aviation energy to sustainable alternatives, with the potential to deliver 20% of the EU’s projected 
SAF requirements of 5 Mt in 2030.  
At its core, SusAlgaeFuel champions circular production , making use of waste digestate from AD as a nutrient 
source for microalgae growth (WP1). This not only minimizes waste but also broadens the sources of feedstock for 
microalgae cultivation, promoting resource efficiency and sustainability. In alignment with the European Green Deal, 
the initiative actively captures CO 2 emissions from biogas upgrading and uses them to support microalgae growth  
(WP1 followed by WP6) . This dual -purpose approach not only curbs carbon emissions but also transforms waste 
CO2 into a valuable resource for fuel production, contributing to climate change mitigation.  
Ensuring the consistent health of microalgae cultures is vital for sustainable fuel production . SusAlgaeFuel is 
developing groundbreaking Process Analytical Technology (PAT) combined with Machine Learning, along with 
selective UV irradiation (WP2) to monitor and purify bacterial contamination, effectively preventing costly culture 
crashes and ensuring a stable and reliable supply of microalgae for fuel production. 
The cascading biorefinery approach (WP3), which leverages energy-saving a utolysis and allows for maximum 
solvent recycling, minimizes energy and solvent requirements while efficiently fractionating biomass into valuable 
components, enhancing overall process sustainability . Microalgae biofuel technology will be significantly 
advanced by developing low-energy technologies to disrupt microalgae cells and free intracellular lipids and proteins. 
Indeed, the proposed wet-processing pre-treatment methods are the potential game-changers, offering a solution to a 
long-standing need for biomass drying.  
Additional improvements in biofuels production will come from the algal -specific process routes to HEFA -SPK, 
improving the attainable yield  of energy- dense aviation fuels by advancing  two separate pathways for fuel 
conversion: lipid hydrotreatment and thermochemical reforming of process waste, i.e. algal residue.(WP4) . Quality 
assurance is paramount, and SusAlgaeFuel will develop purification methods to ensure our microalgal SAF meet s 
international aviation standards and certification requirements (WP4). 
SusAlgaeFuel doesn't stop at technical innovations. It conducts rigorous assessments of the commercial scalability 
and the social and environmental impacts of its production strategies  (WP5). This holistic evaluation provides 
valuable insights into the broader feasibility and sustainability of our  microalgae biofuel production strategies to 
enable iterative optimisation. To demonstrate the real-world applicability of the integrated technologies, we will build 
a pilot-scale system capable of producing 10 kg of algal lipids per year (WP6). This system, located at an AD operator 
site of partner BIAE  in Ireland, allows for the production and quality testing of 1 kg of algal HEFA -SPK within 
project lifetime. This hands-on demonstration serves as a practical showcase of the scalability and performance of 
SusAlgaeFuel's disruptive technologies, and ensures we credibly assess the commercial scalability. Furthermore, 
SusAlgaeFuel is harnessing the power  of digital technology. Encapsulating all the knowledge, knowhow and data 
generated in a digital twin of the integrated fuel production system  will be a major asset in allowing us  to project 
production performance under different scenarios/conditions, s erving as a decision toolbox to guide future 
stakeholders, and facilitating a faster adoption thereby  accelerating the replacement of fossil-based aviation energy 
technologies. Lastly, SusAlgaeFuel recognizes the pivotal role of policy support. Actively engaging in policy 
discussions, it provides concrete policy recommendations at the EU level  (WP7). These recommendations aim to 
foster and promote advanced algal biofuels, aligning with sustainability and climate goals.  
[HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-02-08] [Development of microalgae fuel production and purification technologies for advanced aviation fuels] 
18 
Scale and Significance of the contribution to EO1 
We have made initial scaling calculations to assess the potential long -term impact of SusAlgaeFuel on AD 
operation (i.e. digestate treatment) and SAF production in the EU, taking into account the availability of digestate 
in the EU, the uptake of N by microalgae, the projected growth of AD and projected growth of SAF demand. We 
have used the innovations outlined in SusAlgaeFuel to calculate potential SAF yield from microalgae production.   
Methodology and assumptions: REPowerEU has set a target of 35  BCM of sustainable Biomethane produced 
from AD in Europe by 2030. This is proposed to be achieved through a combination of 4,000 new smaller/medium 
AD Plants producing 4M m 3 per annum (@€80MWH) (~5MW) and 1,000 larger AD pl ants producing 16M m3 
per annum (@€55MWH)(~20MW). At least 56% (19.6 BCM) of the sustainable Biomethane potential is from 
animal manure and agricultural residues44 . The European Biogas association (EBA) has estimated 492 Mtonnes 
of digestate production in Europe in 203044 . The use of digestate varies depending on the feedstock from which it 
is derived, so not all of them will be availed for microalgae valorisation (e.g. d igestate from animal by-products 
or containing heavy metals are not compliant with EU directives for use in food production).  Based on the EBA 
projected digestion production, assuming 50% of digestate is economically available for algal cultivation and 70% 
of that is remaining as liquid digestate fraction after solids removal, we have assumed that 172 Mt of digestate is 
available in Europe as nutrient source for algal cultivation. Since nitrogen is likely to be the limiting nutrient for 
algal growth (considering there is only 0.361% N in the digestate45 ), we have calculated our biomass productivity 
(and subsequent HEF A yield) based on the amount of N available for algal uptake in the digestate. Other 
assumptions: lipid content = 30 wt% biomass, protein content = 35 wt% biomass, sugar content = 35 wt% biomass.  
Results: As shown in Table 2.1a, using SusAlgaeFuel process, we have calculated that each medium -scale and 
large-scale AD plant has the capacity to produce up to 955 and 3,910 tonnes of SAF per annum respectively (as 
HEFA). When scaled across all AD plants in Europe , SusAlgaeFuel process has the potential to treat 172 Mt 
digestate per annum and generate 6.2 Mt of algal biomass per annum, leading to the production of 1 Mt of 
HEFA-SPK per annum (or 20% of Europe’s projected SAF requirements of 5 Mt in 2030). The process will 
also lead to the co-production of 2.2 Mt of protein for feed application and 2.2 Mt of biomass residue that can 
be further converted to SAF via TCR-HDO pathway.  
Table 2.1a: Potential impact of SusAlgaeFuel to the European AD and SAF industries 
 
  
Medium AD Large AD Europe 
~5MW ~20MW   
Digestate produced Tonnes p.a        217,308         889,315         492,000,000 
Liquid digestate available for algae growth Tonnes p.a        152,115         622,521         172,200,000  
N content of liquid digestate % 0.361 0.361 0.361% 
N fraction of algal biomass % 10 10 10% 
Algal Biomass produced (dry weight) Tonnes p.a             5,491           22,473             6,216,420  
HEFA-convertible lipid fraction of algal 
biomass (SusAlgaeFuel process) % 30 30 30 
HEFA to SAF conversion (SusAlgaeFuel) % 58 58 58 
HEFA-SPK yield (as primary SAF) Tonnes p.a                955              3,910             1,081,657 
Protein yield (for feed) Tonnes p.a 1,922 7,866 2,175,747 
Biomass residue yield (for TCR-HDO 
conversion as secondary SAF) Tonnes p.a 1,922 7,866 2,175,747 
The impacts on the associated value chain  of disruptive SusAlgaeFuel SAF will also be a boost for industrial 
competitiveness and leadership as outlined below.  
Impact on the European SAF industry: The SAF industry in Europe is in its infancy. Aviation as an industry faces 
a mounting challenge to decarbonise in line with, or even above, set targets. In the foreseeable future there are three 
energy carriers capable of powering aircraft sustainably: hydrogen, electricity and liquid hydrocarbons (i.e., SAF). 
Without disruptive technology development, liquid hydrocarbons are the only solution for medium/long- range 
aircraft, SAF is, therefore, crucial to the EU's future socio-economic development. EU SAF demand in 2030 will be 
5 Mt, increasing to 41 Mt by 2050. SAF production analysis by SkyNRG indicates that approx. 1 Mt of SAF capacity 
 
44 EBA, Tracking biogas and biomethane deployment across Europe. 2022 
45 AFBI, 27 MONTHS PERFORMANCE SUMMARY FOR ANAEROBIC DIGESTION OF DAIRY COW SLURRY AT 
AFBI HILLSBOROUGH. 2011. 

[HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-02-08] [Development of microalgae fuel production and purification technologies for advanced aviation fuels] 
19 
will be operational in the EU by 20271, representing significant shortcoming to meet demands. The majority of SAF 
in Europe is manufactured from feedstocks such as waste fats, oils and greases utilising HEFA conversion pathways. 
The need to find sustainable alternatives for aviation is clear, but challenges remain in its production, with significant 
price difference to conventional jet fuel as key barrier to large-scale SAF production in Europe . SusAlgaeFuel is a 
gamechanger for the EU’s SAF industry as it will enable the production of 1 Mt of SAF (or 20% of Europe’s projected 
SAF requirements in 2030), and already this potential has sparked commitment of aviation giant Boeing and CityJet, 
who have both agreed to act as advisory panel to the project, and position themselves as early adopters.   
Impact on the European microalgae industry: The EU algae sector has historically been dwarfed by larger markets 
in Asia, accounting for <1% of global algae production, estimated at 32.67 Mt in 2016. Regardless, the EC has 
steadily introduced policies to promote long-term growth of algal industry (EU Bioeconomy Strategy 2018, EU Blue 
Growth Strategy 2012) and recently announced 23 actions plans to unlock the potential of algae in healthier diets, 
lowering CO2 emissions, and addressing water pollution (11/2022). This is expected to be a driver for the growth of 
the industry at a compound annual growth rate  (CAGR) of 5.8% from 2023 to 2030, reaching US $ 355.48 million 
(M) by 2030, up from USD 228.66 M in 2022 46,47,48. SusAlgaeFuel will create a more sustainable and  cost-
competitive EU algae industry through the development of transferrable technologies that can lower the cost of 
microalgae cultivation (WP1-2) and biorefinery (WP3), while increasing feedstock availability through synergy with 
AD. The SusAlgaeFuel technologies can add to the arsenal of innovative technologies for microalgae sectors beyond 
the fuel remit of the current project. Insights into bacteria-microalgae interaction (WP2) can be applied to the growth 
of other algae species on various agri-food effluents (e.g., brewery waste) for wastewater application. Wet biorefinery 
using autolysis in WP3 can provide gentle, non- degradative and low -cost extraction methods for higher -value 
products in nutraceutical applications (e.g., ω- 3 lipids) . SusAlgaeFuel will also confer direct benefits to A4F  
(microalgae technology provider) by diversifying their service using waste rather than commercial nutrients. 
Impact on the European AD industry: The total AD market size was valued at ca. USD 47 billion in 2020, growing 
at a CAGR of 7.55%, and projected to reach about USD 84 billion by 2028. Currently, the EU is the global leader 
in AD with >17,400 plants 9,49,50. AD is expected to play a critical role in EU’s long -term pursuit for energy 
independence and decarbonisation, being one of the few processes able to supply drop -in replacement for 
renewable gas without the need for infrastructure upgrade. EU-wide Directives such as RED II and EU 2030 Climate 
and Energy Framework actively promote AD. Yet, one of the primary bottlenecks associated with AD adoption is 
the high initial investment required to set up the plant. As such, it is critical that any potential revenue stream in the 
process is exploited. While the full digestate has found valuable use as a biofertilizer, there is significant distribution 
cost to deliver the product to end users, and excessive land spreading of digestate can lead to nutrient leaching into 
groundwater (resulting in soil acidification and eutrophication)  and NH3 volatilisation9,Error! Bookmark not defined. ,Error! 
Bookmark not defined.. A potential solution to this problem is to fractionate the digestate into liquid and solid fractions and 
develop novel applications for the li quid fractions, while the nutrient- dense solid fraction (now smaller in volume 
and suitable for long-distance transport) can continue to be applied as a biofertiliser. SusAlgaeFuel will cement EU 
leadership in the AD industry through the development of novel strategies/technologies for microalgae treatment of 
digestate nutrients and direct capture of biogenic CO2 emission from point source, enabling the valorisation of their 
waste products into nutrient- dense biofertilisers and valuable microalgae biomass. This creates new commercial 
circular bioeconomy avenues to diversify income for AD operators and de-risk investment, which in turn can boost 
AD deployment in the EU.     
EO2 Reduced cost and improved efficiency of sustainable microalgae-based and/or direct solar renewable fuel 
technologies and their value chains. 
Aligned with the important relevant key priority in SET Action 8 to reduce the cost of algae advanced fuel to <35 
€/MWh (or 0.49 $/kg HEFA) by 2030, SusAlgaeFuel aims to reduce the cost of microalgae SAF from the anticipated  
12.3 $/kg HEFA  to 6.3 $/kg HEFA (equivalent to a decrease of 4 9%), thus directly addressing the economic 
barrier that has hindered the widespread adoption of renewable aviation fuels.  
Our innovation will achieve improv ements in the overall cost of algae fuels through the circular use of cheap 
wastes digestate from AD as a low-cost nutrient source for microalgae growth which in turn reduces/eliminates the 
need for expensive commercial nutrients and direct capture of CO 2 emissions from biogas upgrading to support 
microalgae growth providing a low -cost source of CO 2 (WP1). The novel in-line PAT combined with machine 
learning and selective UV irradiation, by effectively monitoring and purifying bacterial contamination, will prevent 
costly culture crashes.  The cascading biorefinery design, which relies on autolysis  in wet biomass slurry (thus 
bypassing the need for drying while minimising the energy requirements for cell disruption)  coupled with direct 
solvent extraction whic h allows for facile solvent separation and thus maximizes solvent recycling, will directly 
reduce energy and solvent requirements, and results in lower operational costs while efficiently producing multiple 
valuable components from biomass  (i.e. protein se rum for feed) . The development of optimised algae -specific 
 
46 DOI: 10.3389/fnut.2018.00058.  
47 Commission, E. Commission proposes action to fully harness the potential of algae in Europe for healthier diets, lower CO2 
emissions, and addressing water pollution. 2022 
48 DataBridge. Europe Microalgae Market – Industry Trends and Forecast to 2030. 2023  
49 DOI: 10.1016/j.rcrx.2019.100029.  
50 DOI: 10.1016/j.biortech.2018.07.100.  
[HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-02-08] [Development of microalgae fuel production and purification technologies for advanced aviation fuels] 
20 
thermocatalytic pathways for converting algae lipids into HEFA -SPK and residue into TCR- HDO oil ensures 
efficient fuel production with higher yields, contributing to cost reduction and improved ove rall efficiency 
(WP4). SusAlgaeFuel will also assess the efficiency and commercial scalability of the entire process train as well as 
individual sub-process (WP5). This holisti  approach addressing multiple stages of the value chain contributes to 
streamlining the entire microalgae-based renewable fuel production process, enhancing overall efficiency and cost -
effectiveness. Importantly, the pilot production of SPKs i n WP6 brings the chance to reassess the cost estimates 
and/or validate approaches, offering more confidence in the cost predictions for the 10,000,000 kg p.a. biorefinery. 
The Energy Return on Investment (EROI) measures the efficiency of fuel production an d is defined the ratio of 
final energy produced by the biofuel to energy expended in its production along the entire value chain, The EROI of 
microalgal biofuels to-date remains unfavourable, hindering their swift development. This is contributed by several 
factors, including low biomass productivity during cultivation, high energy demand associated with cell disruption, 
high solvent requirements leading to high energy demand for lipid extraction, and low conversion efficiency of HEFA 
reactions (<50%). SusAlgaeFuel will improve EROI through a) the development of cultivation strategies  using 
nutrient-rich liquid digestate and direct CO 2 capture capable achieving high lipid accumulation using oleaginous 
species (WP1), b) the development of a biorefinery using autolysis with the capacity to reduce the energy demand 
for cell disruption by 50%, (WP3), c) the selection of low-polar solvents for facile separation from water (facilitating 
effective solvent recycling which further reduces solvent usage) (WP 3), d) development of HEFA -SPK catalytic 
pathways tailored for microalgal lipids enabling high conversion efficiency (WP4).  
Scale and Significance of the contribution to EO2 
We have carried out preliminary calculations to assess the potential impact of SusAlgaeFuel on the cost and EROI 
of microalgae SAF production. A baseline process and the SusAlgaeFuel process were compared for the production 
of 10,000,000 kg HEFA-SPK/year. The baseline process has been assumed based o n conventional experimental 
process as there is currently no commercially operating microalgal SAF production process.   
Methodology and assumptions : Baseline process consists of cultivation in  photobioreactors using artificial 
nutrients (NH3 for nitrogen, DAP for phosphorus) and commercial-grade CO2, harvesting via flocculation followed 
by filtration, cell disruption with HPH, lipid extraction with hexane, fuel conversion and purification to HEFA -
SPK. SusAlgaeFuel process is comprised of cultivation in photobioreactors using digestate and CO2 capture from 
AD, harvesting via flocculation followed by filtration, cell disruption with autolysis + HPH, lipid extraction with 
hexane at maximum recovery and with emulsion mitigation, fuel conversion and purification to HEFA -SPK via 
flagship method developed at UCAM. To estimate HEFA-SPK cost, we have calculated a full mass balance and 
energy balance for both baseline and SusAlgaeFuel processes on the basis of 10,000,000 kg HEFA-SPK/year 
with the following calculation assumptions:  Equipment lifetime = 20 years. Cultivation: final biomass 
concentration = 1 g biomass/L. Cell disruption: biomass concentration in slurry = 250 g biomass/kg slurry, 90% 
rupture, 6 pass, 1500 bar. Lipid extraction consists of an extraction unit, a centrifugation unit and an evaporation 
unit. Lipid yield = 80%. Energy content of HEFA-SPK = 47 MJ/kg. The mass balances are shown in Figure 2.1a 
and 2.1b, while the results for cost estimates and energy demand are shown in Table 2.1b and 2.1c.                  
Results: Cost calculations in Table 2.1b show 
that the SusAlgaeFuel process can lead to a step-
change reduction in the production cost of algae 
SAFs, reducing the potential cost per kg  of 
HEFA-SPK from 12.3$ to 6.3$ (equivalent to 
a decrease of 49%). The reduction is primarily 
driven by a decrease in operating cost (a 56.8% 
decrease in OPEX) brought about by a series of 
enabling innovations investigated in each 
process step along the value chain. The main 
contributors to the reduced OPEX are: the use of 
liquid digestate during cultivation as N an d P 
source to replace (as much as possible) costly 
artificial nutrients, the effective capture of CO 2 from AD during cultivation to replace (as much as possible) 
commercial CO2, the reduction in energy cost of cell disruption due to co-development with autolysis, the dramatic 
decrease in solvent usage during lipid extraction due to effective solvent recycling and emulsion mitigation 
strategies, and increased lipid- to-HEFA conversion yield coupled with reduced H 2 consumption during fuel 
conversion due to the  use of multifunctional catalyst and looping process. Even though the anticipated cost of 
HEFA at project completion ($6.3/kg HEFA) is still significantly higher than the cost of conventional jet fuel ($0.7 
– 1.4/kg), it compares relatively well with SAFs derived from other feedstocks ($1.9 – 7.7/kg SAF)1, towards the 
attainment of cost competitiveness beyond the project lifetime through process improvement, scale-up, and 
government subsidies. EROI calculations in Table 2.1c show that the innovations investigated in SusAlgaeFuel 
can lead to a significant reduction in the energy requirements for microalgal HEFA production  (up to 66% 
decrease), consequentially improving the energy balance of the value chain and dramatically altering the EROI of 
microalgae SAFs to make the process energetically favourable.   
Figure 2.1a: Mass balance of baseline process (10M kg HEFA-
SPK/year) 
[HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-02-08] [Development of microalgae fuel production and purification technologies for advanced aviation fuels] 
21 
 
51 DOI: 10.1021/acs.iecr.8b03999  
52 DOI: 10.1016/j.biortech.2013.02.091.  
                                                                                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.1b: Mass balance of SusAlgaeFuel process (10M kg HEFA-SPK/year). 
Table 2.1b: Cost comparison between baseline and SusAlgaeFuel process (Production basis: 10M kg HEFA-SPK/year). 
Process Step  
 
Baseline  
Process 
($/kg 
HEFA-SPK) 
SusAlgaeFuel  
Process 
($/kg HEFA-
SPK) 
 
% 
Change 
Enabling innovation driving cost reduction in 
SusAlgaeFuel 
Cultivation  
CAPEX 0.35 0.22 -36.3 N/A^ 
OPEX 2.32 0.47 -79.6 
WP1, WP5, WP6: N and P cost reduced to 20% 
due to use of digestate. CO2 supply cost reduced to 
20% due to direct capture from AD. Lipid content 
increased from 21 to 30 wt%.   
Harvesting 
CAPEX 0.64 0.64 0.0 N/A^ 
OPEX 0.93 0.65 -30.2 N/A^ 
Cell 
disruption 
CAPEX 0.25 0.25 0.0 N/A^ 
OPEX 1.61 0.56 -65.2 WP3, WP5, WP6: energy cost of HPH reduced 
from 0.6 to 0.3 kWh/kg biomass due to autolysis 
Lipid 
extraction 
CAPEX 0.12 0.08 -35.8 N/A^ 
OPEX 2.28 0.49 -78.4 
WP3, WP5, WP6: solvent usage reduced from 15 
L/kg biomass to 3.5 L/kg biomass. Solvent 
recycling increased from 65% to 95% due to 
emulsion mitigation. 
Fuel 
conversion 
(HEFA) & 
purification 
CAPEX 0.84 0.76 -9.1 N/A^ 
OPEX 2.92 2.17 -25.6 
WP4, WP5, WP6: HEFA conversion yield 
increased from 47% to 58%. H2 consumption 
decreased from 0.34 to 0.25 kg H2/kg HEFA-SPK 
CAPEX 2.19 1.94 -11.3  
OPEX 10.10 4.40 -56.8  
Sum  12.30 6.30 -48.6  
CAPEX includes equipment cost, land cost, and indirect cost. OPEX includes the cost of energy, nutrients, water and labour. 
Formulas inError! Bookmark not defined.,51,52 were used for calculations.  
^ No specific innovation on the cost category. Reduction incurred indirectly due to improvement in other categories (e.g. less 
usage of solvent during lipid extraction reduces OPEX but also allows for a smaller extraction unit that reduces CAPEX). 
Table 2.1c: Energy-demand comparison between baseline process and SusAlgaeFuel process for HEFA production.  
Process Step  
 
Baseline  
Process 
(kWh/year) 
SusAlgaeFuel  
Process 
(kWh/year) 
% 
Reduction 
Enabling innovation driving energy-
demand reduction in SusAlgaeFuel 
Cultivation  11,357,522 7,185,817 -36.7 WP1: CO2 delivery using membrane  
Harvesting 7,471,169 4,726,951 -36.7 N/A 
Cell disruption 75,987,842 24,038,462 -68.4 WP3: Autolysis 
Lipid extraction 205,844,732 65,132,212 -68.4 WP3: Less solvent usage leading to less 
energy spent in solvent evaporation   
Fuel conversion 2,063,830 1,705,644 -17.4 WP4: Heat integration  
Sum of energy demand 302,725,094 102,789,085 -66.0  
Energy output* 130,555,556 130,555,556 0  
EROI 0.43 1.27   
 

[HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-02-08] [Development of microalgae fuel production and purification technologies for advanced aviation fuels] 
22 
EO4 Enhanced sustainability of aviation and/or shipping fuels, taking fully into account circular economy, 
social, economic and environmental aspects in line with the European Green Deal priorities. 
SusAlgaeFuel directly delivers this expected outcome on multiple levels . Waste digestate from AD as a nutrient 
source for microalgae growth exemplifies a circular economy approach, thereby minimizing waste, reducing the 
environmental footprint, and promoting resource efficiency and direct capture of biogenic CO 2 emissions from 
biogas upgrading to support microalgae growth, reducing GHG emissions and contributing to carbon neutrality 
(WP1, WP6). Overall, the proposed system will enhance the commercial profitability of AD operation, enabling the 
valorisation of both of their waste streams (CO 2 effluent and digestate) into valuable microalgae biomass and 
biofertilizer, which in turn have multiplier impact in promoting AD deployment in the EU, sustainable waste 
management and displacement of GHG-intensive chemical fertilisers. Production of microalgae-based SAFs via our 
innovative process leads to a direct reduction in carbon emissions compared to traditional fossil-based fuels.  
The cascading biorefinery approach, which involves fractionating biomass into lipids, protein serum, and cellulose-
rich biomass residue, demonstrates the utilization of multiple components of the biomass, contributing to maximize 
the value extracted from the feedstock and promoting circularity (WP3, WP4). Indeed, the production of protein-rich 
serum from biorefinery (WP3) can contribute to food security in Europe through the development of locally 
produced feed ingredients, partially alleviating the EU’s dependence on imported soya meal feed and reducing 
the carbon footprint associated with soy plantation (estimated at 20% of anthropogenic global CO
2 emissions).  
Our entire approach is underpinned by a comprehensive Whole Life Cycle Analysis to assess sustainability (WP5) , 
and our emphasis on reducing carbon emissions, resource consumption, and waste generation directly aligns with 
the priorities of the European Green Deal and contributes to Europe's commit ment to becoming climate-neutral 
and fostering a sustainable and circular economy, offering tremendous potential in driving a sustainable aviation 
sector. Once the certified SusAlgaeFuel SAF is market available, adoption by the aviation industry will have radical 
emissions reduction impacts, which have already attracted the attention of Boeing and CityJet. The stakes are high 
in that the CO
2 emissions of all flights departing from EU27+EFTA airports reached 147 MT in 2019, which was 
34% more than in 2005 53. In 2050, it is predicted that in -sector measures could reduce CO2 emissions by 69% to 
59 million tonnes  compared to a  business-as-usual “technology freeze” scenario53. 37% of this re duction could 
come from SAF 53, and with SusAlgaeFuel gearing up with potential to occupy 20% of the market  (discussed in 
EO1), it can play a pivotal role in realising this. 
Scale and Significance of the contribution to EO4 
We have carried out an initial life cycle analysis (SimaPro) on the proposed SusAlgaeFuel HEFA-SPK pathway 
to establish a ‘well to wake’ gCO2-e/MJ of neat SAF produced to ASTM D1655 standard.  
Methodology and assumptions: The boundary conditions were defined to ensure compliance with the core 
boundary conditions that ICAO CORSIA approved SAFs use: Feedstock Cultivation – Feedstock Harvesting – 
Feedstock Processing & Extraction – Feedstock Transportation – HEFA Jet Fuel Conversion – Jet Fuel 
Transportation – Jet Fuel Combustion. Allocation to co-products is included on a conservative mass balance basis. 
LCA model was built on the mass and energy balances obtained in Figure 2.1b. The following LCA assumptions 
were made: Power supply = 80% AD powered via biogas consumption, 20% Grids Main powered. CO2 intensity 
Irelands Grid at 345gCO2/kWh. Heat supply = 80% biogas, 20% Mains electricity. Allocation: 50% to lipid, 50% 
to protein co-product. Actual mass ratios are 1:1.458. (LIPID: Protein). Conservative 1:1 allocation is used until 
RSB RED Certification is reviewed. HEFA conversion step = 10g CO2/MJ for the HEFA Process. Estimated based 
on ICAO standards. Lipid to SAF conversion assumed at 1.47:1. Shipping and road transport = Dublin-Rotterdam-
Sky NRG DSL 01 Plant-EHAM Schipol Fuel Tank Farm. The conversion of biomass residue to TCR -HDO fuel 
has not been considered in thi s LCA analysis due to lack of literature data. The process will likely improve the  
gCO2-eq/MJ value for SusAlgaeFuel. 
Results: The initial results predict an LCA figure of 
32.73 gCO2-eq/MJ of SAF produced on a ‘well to 
wake’ basis; it should be noted that further reductions 
are expected when a detailed LCA is carried out. This 
analysis indicates that algal HEFA -SPK produced 
using SusAlgaeFuel innovations can lead to a 63.6% 
reduction in g  CO2-eq/MJ compared with 
conventional Jet Fuel  (90 gCO2-eq/MJ). The algal 
SAF also compares favourably with others SAFs as 
can be seen in Figure 2.1c, performing better 
compared to HEFAs derived from high ILUC 
feedstock such as  soybean and palm oil.                                                                                                      
 
53 European Aviation Environmental Report 2022.  
Figure 2.1c: Initial LCA results for SusAlgaeFuel HEFA 

[HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-02-08] [Development of microalgae fuel production and purification technologies for advanced aviation fuels] 
23 
Contributions to EO3, EO5 and EO6 
By concretely delivering EO1, EO2 and EO4, SusAlgaeFuel will consequently play a contributory role in EO6, EO3:   
■ Increase the European energy security and reliability by enlarging the renewable feedstock basis for aviation 
fuels as well as maintaining and fostering the European global leadership in affordable, secure and sustainable 
microalgae-based fuel renewable energy technologies (EO6). As can be seen, SusAlgaeFuel's circular production 
model has the per annum potential to treat 172 Mt of digestate and generate 6.2 Mt of algal biomass, leading to the 
production of 1 Mt of HEFA-SPK (or 20% of EU’s projected SAF requirements of 5 Mt in 2030) at a reduced cost 
per kg of algal HEFA-SPK of 6.3$ (a decrease of 49%  from estimated 12.3$). The approach of utilizing waste 
digestate and capturing CO2 emissions for microalgae cultivation significantly expands Europe's renewable 
feedstock basis, reducing reliance on fossil fuels and thereby enhancing energy reliability even in times of supply 
disruptions. Attaining affordability as we scale the technologies, building from the TRL4-5 platform of this project, 
ensures energy accessibility while reducing the vulnerability of European industries to energy price fluctuations.  
■ Increase technology leadership, competitiveness and technology export potential of European industry in 
possibly game -changing microalgae and/or direct solar renewable fuel technologies (EO3) . SusAlgaeFuel's 
pioneering technologies will position Europe at the forefront of SAF innovation. This leadership not only enhances 
EU’s competitiveness but also strengthens the region's role, credibility, and influence  in shaping global efforts to 
combat climate change. Underpinned by an IP strategy (Task 7.4) to protect our novel innovations, there will be real 
opportunity for licensing of these game changing technologies worldwide as global demand for SAF grows.  
Finally, inspired by EO5 Reinforced European scientific basis and European export potential for renewable 
energy technologies through international collaborations , through Task 7. 3 Stakeholder engagement and 
networking, we will outreach to and explore collaborations for sharing knowledge  and expertise with relevant 
stakeholders, including other EU projects funded in the area of sustainable fuel and aviation.  
Contributions to the wider impacts of the ‘Sustainable, secure and competitive energy supply’ destination: 
SusAlgaeFuel will contribute to diversifying the portfolio of sustainable solutions for difficult -to-
decarbonise/electrify transportation sectors , fostering European global leadership in affordable, secure and 
sustainable renewable energy technologies.  Developing a whole algae value chain is crucial to achieving climate-
neutral energy carriers that are cost-competitive with incumbent solutions. The innovation- driven and diverse 
approach adopted by SusAlgaeFuel sets the stage for European industry leadership in game-changing renewable fuel 
technologies, positioning Europe  as a technological leader in microalgae- based renewable fuel production. This 
leadership has the potential to catalyse future partnerships and investments, further driving efficiency agenda. 
SusAlgaeFuel objectives overlap with Destination-specific Impacts: (1) Improving the availability of disruptive 
renewable fuel technologies. SusAlgaeFuel will help make algal fuels a reality, bringing innovative ideas to improve 
cost-effectiveness, sustainability and range of product portfolio (two jet fuels, a protein serum as feed, a biofertiliser) 
that is resilient to future market changes. (2) Reducing costs and improving the efficiency of the whole technology. 
SusAlgaeFuels will tackle the hardest problems in algae technologies, namely the costs of biomass processing and 
low product yields. One of the most significant cost reduction s will come from wet algae biorefinery (employing 
autolysis) and choice of extraction solvents  enabling solvent recycling. (3) Derisking of renewable fuel 
technologies. This overlaps with the disruptiveness of the SusAlgaeFuel solutions, where the aim  is to develop a 
multi-product approach (four different products), with production adapting to the market needs, thus, de-risking the 
whole biorefinery chain, the same way petrochemical refineries work today. (4) Enhanced sustainability of 
renewable fuels through dedicated work in relation to life -cycle assessments (WP5) and business -model 
development (WP7), that aligns development with the European Green Deal priorities. (5) More effective market 
uptake. The SusAlgaeFuel team brings together academics, SMEs, industry partners and non-profit organisations all 
interested in the early commercialisation of the proposed solutions. SusAlgaeFuel will work towards effective 
technology rollout from the start of the project, increasing the chance for success by implementing feedback from 
discussions with industry stakeholders within the consortium, as well as those reached by C&D activities, to develop 
a dedicated business canvas/commercialisation model (WP7). (6) Accelerating Carbon Capture, Use and Storage 
through the development of new enabling technology for effective and low -energy delivery of CO 2 to microalgae 
culture, thus facilitating direct capture of CO2 from CO2 emission point source.  
2.1.2. Target Groups  
Table 2.1d: Target stakeholders for SusAlgaeFuel 
No. Target stakeholders 
(Examples) 
Why SusAlgaeFuel is important to 
stakeholders 
How adoption of results contributes to 
impact achievement 
1 AD operators as 
technology adopters 
(e.g. BIAE*) 
Microalgae as a sustainable strategy 
for AD waste valorisation  
- Adoption by AD operators will increase 
algae fuel feedstock availability which in 
turn ‘improves the availability of disruptive 
sustainable fuel technologies’  2 Algae producers, 
technology providers  
Novel technologies for reducing cost 
of algae production and processing 
[HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-02-08] [Development of microalgae fuel production and purification technologies for advanced aviation fuels] 
24 
(e.g. A4F*) - Direct CO2 capture by microalgae will 
accelerate ‘Carbon Capture, Use and 
Storage’ & lead to 'reduced cost and 
improved efficiency of sustainable 
microalgae-based fuel technologies & their 
value chains’. 
- Adoption by stakeholders will create a full 
value chain which ‘derisks renewable fuel 
technologies’ 
Adoption will ready the aviation industry in 
the future for algae fuel and ‘accelerates the 
replacement of fossil-based energy 
technologies in aviation’ 
3 Fuel/SAF producers 
(e.g. Neste) 
Technologies to produce algal 
HEFA-SPK and TCR oil at low cost 
and at scale 
4 Aviation sector: 
Aircraft manufacturers 
(e.g. Boeing^), Leasers 
(e.g. Avolon^), 
Airports & airlines 
(e.g. Aer Lingus^) 
Possibility of cost competitive al gal 
SAF in the near future and 
preparation for adoption in the 
aviation industry (e.g. engine 
modification). Opportunity to build 
their strategies and brand around 
sustainability and attract a growing 
market share. 
5 By-product users: 
Biofertiliser producers,  
Animal-feed producers  
Digestate solid fraction and protein 
serum as novel ingredients for 
biofertilisers and animal feed  
Side products enable income diversification 
which ‘increases resilience of energy system’ 
and ‘derisks renewable fuel technologies’.  
6 Sensor manufacturers 
(e.g. IRIS*) 
Manufacture of in-line sensor for 
monitoring algae culture  
Adoption will ‘speed up new digital 
technologies in the energy sector’. 
7 Fuel certification 
authorities (e.g. RSB^) 
A new SAF feedstock based on 
algae for certification 
Certification enables mass production and 
‘improves the availability of disruptive fuel 
technologies’ 
8 Industry associations: 
microalgae (EABA),  
AD (EBA), aviation & 
SAF (EASA) 
Novel technologies in AD waste 
valorisation, algae biotechnology, 
SAF conversion and purification for 
adoption in wider sector 
Expand the reach of the project which in turn 
catalyses wider adoption in the respective 
industries and ‘improves the availability of 
disruptive sustainable fuel technologies’  
9 Academic community  Novel sciences in algae SAF value 
chain 
Results to catalyse further research that can 
further ‘reduce the cost of renewable fuel 
technologies’. Joint activities with EU 
projects can promote adoption by 
Stakeholders 
10 Related EU projects 
(REFOLUTION, 
FLITE)  
Synergies in project scope and 
results for collaboration and joint 
activities 
11 Policymakers and MPs 
(national & EU^) 
New algae SAF value chain 
contributing to EU directives/policy: 
Fit for 55, ReFuelEU, REDIII  
Evidence-based algae SAF technologies lead 
to enactment of policies and carbon trade-offs 
that accelerate ‘the replacement of fossil-
based energy technologies’.  
12 Investors in green 
technology  
Potentially profitable undertaking in 
disruptive algal SAF validated in a 
pilot with credible upscale potential  
Adoption can lead to investment to further 
‘reduce the cost of renewable fuel 
technologies’  
13 University students  Understanding of algae SAFs Training of future generation of scientists  
14 General public/air 
passengers 
Sustainable and eco-friendly fuels 
for air travel.  
Better understanding of sustainable fuels a 
allows more informed travel choice. 
*Consortium members in SusAlgaeFuel, ^ through SFS network and SusAlgaeFuel advisory panel  
2.1.3. Barriers and Mitigation 
A key driver for adoption of SusAlgaeFuel is the global aviation industry targets to be carbon neutral by 2050. 
This will be further fuelled by impending legislation, whereby for example, the European Commission has proposed 
a SAF blending mandate for fuel supplied to EU airports, with minimum shares of SAF gradually increasing from 
2% in 2025 to 63% in 2050Error! Bookmark not defined. . Despite the tremendous opportunities this opens for SAF, a series 
of barriers exist:  
■ Availability of abundant and inexpensive nutrients: This is a major barrier in algal cultivation. In SusAlgaeFuel 
it will be solved by marrying microalgae farming under different  autotrophic regimes with critical AD operation  
(WP1), thus leading to an increase in the availability of algal feedstock while decreasing cost of cultivation. 
■ Cost of SAFs: SusAlgaeFuel aims to make a more cost-competitive microalgae biofuel. If successful in delivering 
our technical innovations, as calculated in Section 2.1.1, we can reduce the cost of algal SAFs to 6.3$/kg, in line with 
SAFs from other feedstocks ($1.9 – 7.7/kg SAF). Despite this improvement, however, algal will remain significantly 
more expensive than petroleum diesel (ca.  $0.7 – 1.4/kg), meaning that multiple step -change innovations in algae 
fuel production beyond the project will still be needed to achieve technology rollout. This step change can be brought 
about by continuing R&Ds which build on SusAlgaeFuel technologies through larger-scale demonstration and 
subsequent process improvement or complement them with new paradigms (e.g. genetic engineering).  
■ Scale: Another major hurdle faced by algal biofuels, such as the proposed SusAlgaeFuel, is that of scale54. Current 
SAF production facilities are tiny compared to the economies of scale available to fossil fuels. Unless we can achieve 
 
54 Digest, B. The Next Big Step for Algae and Sustainable Aviation Fuels. 2022 
[HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-02-08] [Development of microalgae fuel production and purification technologies for advanced aviation fuels] 
25 
meaningful production, the goals so many have set for a low carbon aviation industry will be impossible to meet. To 
the end, the current call topic rightly calls for proposals to ‘also address systemic constraints and opport unities for 
scaling-up algae-based and/or solar fuel technologies’. To address the fundamental limitations of scale, in addition 
to investigating improved cultivation techniques, advanced technology, and effective process integration as a blend 
of approaches , we have also introduced an Industry 4.0 grade Process Analytical Technology  (PAT) driven 
Digital Twin  (WP6) to assist in understanding the deve loped processes and simulating their behaviour towards 
optimisation and predicting capacities at industrial scales. Indeed, a PAT-enabled Quality by Design (QbD) approach 
can help improve scale-up by combining real-time monitoring, advanced analytics, and systematic optimization to 
ensure consistent product quality, process efficiency, and successful scale -up. Developing a comprehensive 
understanding of the relationships between these parameters will lead to the identification of critical process 
parameters (CPPs) and critical quality attributes (CQAs).  The ability to apply M odel Predictive Control (MPC)  
strategies that use real-time data and predictive models to adjust process parameters during scale up would help to 
maintain optimal conditions and mitigate disturbances.  
■ Lack of financing: A major barrier to the adoption of our results will be the continuing need for investment beyond 
project lifetime through either industry/private or government mechanisms at global/EU/national levels. Outreach to 
investors and venture capital firms to secure a future funding pathway for technology commercialization will be an 
important endeavour. To facilitate this, a series of strategies will be pursued: 
• By combining PAT with Digital Twin technology, we have the ability to simulate process performance and yields 
in scaled up scenarios, to provide data-driven insights and information for investors. Also, bringing the technology 
successfully to TRL5 with a physical pilot demonstrator at an AD facility in Ireland thanks to a high- profile 
Horizon Europe research-industry partnership that can validate pilot scale production, backed by PAT -enabled 
digital twin technology, can prove to potential investors that the scaled up technology will work.  
• Moreover, analysis of resulting fuel products in compliance with ASTM fuel property specifications (WP6), will 
be another great asset.  RSB certification will underpin the case for production, up- scaling and trading the final 
SAF product within the EU, advancing the business case for future investors.  
• Wide dissemination of the  SusAlgaeFuel results amongst relevant stakeholders, coupled with verified business 
models to ensure post-project scale up and route to market so the results can be exploited by potential end users  
(WP7), underpinned by multi-faceted dissemination and exploitation strategies to maximise impact (Section 2.2). 
• We have also added policy analysis as an integral component of WP 7, aiming to engage policy decision makers 
(through SFS expanded network) early in the project to further promote the inclusion of algae fuels and 
carbon/emission trading schemes in future EU and national directives. This will facilitate a more conducive 
funding environment for the commercialisation of algae SAFs beyond SusAlgaeFuel. 
■ Cooperation challenges in building a new value chain: A further barrier to our results uptake is the requirement 
for multiple stakeholders to come together in a new value chain to commercialise the results (e.g. AD operator, 
algae farmers, fuel/SAF producers, sensor manufacturers), each having different market needs and business models. 
To mitigate this risk, our consortium includes representatives  from the industry value chain (A4F as an algae 
technology provider, BIAE as an AD operator, and IRIS as a sensor developer and real-time monitoring and digital 
expert), who are each motivated to secure a competitive advantage in these businesses through participation in this 
project. Moreover, we have integrated business -model development into our core activities in WP7, the aim of 
which is to establish m ultiparty dialogue for the development of mutually beneficial commercialisation plan. 
Excellent and validated technologies that can deliver a certified SAF at the necessary future scales and cost, and the 
interest of flagship early adopters (e.g. Boeing, C ityJet) who sit at the demand end of the value chain can have a 
positive impact for mobilising a new microalgae SAF value chain in Europe