4. VALUE PROPOSITION 
The innovation: SUSTAINEXT will industrially deploy a unique smart, dynamic, disruptive, and multi -product 
biorefinery that will transform the plant-based ingredients sector. This first of its kind model will enable to maximize 
the obtained value out of processed feedstocks  with an optimal cascading use of bio -based feedstock, aiming to 
achieve “zero waste” and “zero-pollution” operations. Moreover, the project will showcase a first-of its kind model 
easily replicable by the whole European bio-based industry. This new model is adaptable to each type and quality of 
feedstock and able to switch to renewable energy sources . All in all, resulting in an improved environmental 
performing biorefinery, with maximum resource and energy-efficiency. 
The model is based on the integration of the whole supply chain - from feedstock to end users - applying a disruptive 
circular model based on a smart dynamic analytical biorefinery (DYANA). This system is a smart dynamic biorefining 
process for the cascade valorisation (12 valorisation routes- VR) of feedstocks. Each production process is optimized 
batch-wise according to the initial composition of the feedstock (feedstock suitability index – FSI) to deliver maximum 
value with minimum environmental impact and ensuring resource efficiency. DYANA will allow to achieve the 
complete valorisation of the processed feedstock with a zero -waste and zero -emissions ambition and deliver 46 
plant-based healthy extracts and functional ingredients.  DYANA has been developed with a novel concept based on 
several aspects: 
 
 
Figure 1.2 Main concepts of SUSTAINEXT 
 
The team: This challenge requires to build up a prosperous team covering the whole value chain and with 
demonstrated technological development. SUSTAINEXT has put together a competitive highly specialised consortium 
covering the whole value chain . Agro-industrial biomass will be locally sourced by INNO (olive), AGROS (artichoke 
and pomegranate), DOP (cardoon); MAPs will be sustainably cultivated b y TABEX, DOP, INP and CTAEX; MAPs 
cultivation in agrivoltaics will be developed by ENEL; ARRAM and NATAC will be in charge of the biorefinery design 
and construction; sensor technology development will be provided by IRIS; market uptake will be fostered by  end 
users within the consortium NUT (nutraceuticals), STAR (food), ACEL (pets), MIAVIT (feed additives), MBL (cosmetics) 
and BIOM (fertilizers and biostimulants); sustainability assessment will be done by ECO; and D&C and multifactor 
approach will be performed by BIOPLAT and FUNCYT.  
 
The feedstocks: SUSAINEXT will be industrially deployed with six sustainably and locally sourced European feedstocks: 
three agro-industrial side-streams (olive, artichoke/cardoon, and pomegranate)  and three medicinal and Aromatic 
Plants (MAPs) (camomile, rosemary, and lemon verbena) and. 10,000 tonnes are foreseen to be used in year 5-after 
project during exploitation phase. 
 
10 Echemi, 2022. Overview of the Global Botanical Extracts Market Under Today Economic Model. Published 18-03-2022. Accessed 13-09-2022.  

 
 
 - Page 5 of 70 
- Olive biomass will be locally supplied by INNO, a joint venture between Natac and Olei cola El Tejar the largest 
olive biomass manager in the world (15 % of total world olive biomass).  
- Pomegranate and artichoke side-streams will be locally supplied by AGROS, a biomass operator closely linked 
with Spanish agroindustry. 
- Cardoon side-streams from cheese coagulant production will be locally supplied by DOP Torta del Casar. 
- MAPs plants will be grown in disused tobacco fields by TABEX and in agrivoltaics system by ENEL.  
 
The flagship: Such innovation does not start from scratch, but instead will be built upon the company’s already 
innovative manufacturing ISO 14001 certified plant in Hervás, Extremadura. The current f actory has an extraction 
capacity of 3,000 tons/year and was built in 2020. It has a modern and efficient unit for polyphenol production 
equipped with extraction, concentration, aqueous phase purification, spray-dry drying and clean room. SUSTAINEXT 
aims to design and scale up new equipment to be integrated with the existing facility to deploy a disruptive dynamic 
biorefinery able to address the newly defined processes and integrate the plant as a whole to scale up the DYANA 
concept.  
Moreover, a circular by design will be implemented to achieve a NetZero status and a zero pollution and zero waste 
ambition. The main aim is to convert a modern state of the art polyphenols production plant into a first -of-its kind 
dynamic multiproduct pla nt unique in the plant -based ingredients sector worldwide. The present project will not 
only enable Natac to be more efficient, but also to manufacture new products and extracts in a multiproduct side -
stream methodology, and to become a zero -waste and zero-pollution company, getting ahead of the future of the 
industry and lining up with consumer demands. 
 
The products: SUSTAINEXT will use 6 feedstocks to develop 12 valorisation routes ( fig 1.8) to yield 46 plant -based 
healthy extracts and functional ingredients out of which 13 are totally new in the world and 12 are newly produced 
in Europe (currently imported from APAC, mainly China). 24 of these ingredients belongs to the extensive polyphenol 
family, 14 are terpenoids and the rest to other chemical familie s. This product to be used in target high prized 
markets: food supplements (NUT), feed additives (MIAVIT), food ingredients (STAR), pet additives (ACEL), cosmetics 
(MBL) and performance chemicals (NATAC). As mentioned, SUSTAINEXT combines state of the art commodities with 
a solid presence in the market and most innovative ingredients. This will warranty short term sales right after the 
flagship launch while entering the market with more innovative products.  
 
Brand owners within t he consortium: As mentioned, Natac is a solid company with a consolidated B2B position in 
the market. However, in order to maximise the market entrance of newly developed products, SUSTAINEXT includes 
a recognized brand owners from target sectors: food sup plements (Nutraresearch), food industry (GB Foods), feed 
additive industry (MIAVIT), pet additive market (ACEL) and cosmetic (MIBELLE).  
 
5. IMPACTS 
- SUSTAINEXT will position Natac in the forefront of plan -based ingredients industry breaking the most 
important market barriers, while achieving a NetZero status. 
- A revenue of 194,71 M€ in year 5 is forecasted with a net profit of 94.11 M€. 
- 46 plant-based healthy extracts and functional ingredients with market prize between 20 - 300 €/kg. 
- A new technology (DYANA algorithm) will dramatically change the way cascade biorefining is approached. 
- SUSTAINEXT will be highly replicable in biobased Europe.  
- Feedstocks providers within the consortium will benefit from new business opportunities. 
- End users will deliver cost-effective, sustainable, and high-quality new formulations to the market.   
- The regional impact in Extremadura will be decisive in terms of socioeconomic develop ment (job creation, 
investment attraction, new value chains unlocking). 
- It  will create more than 6,300 new green jobs (1,500 direct and 4,800 indirect and induced) 
 
SUSTAINEXT has received institutional support at all levels.  Mr. Guillermo Fernández Vara ( President of 
Extremadura), Ms. Begoña García (Regional Minister for Agriculture, Rural Development , Population and Territory 
Councillor of Agriculture) and Ms. Patricia Valle (Mayor of Hervás) have signed letters where they show the strong 
commitment of the region towards this challenging project. Moreover, SUSTAINEXT has received additional support 
from investors, local community, end users, civil associations, among other. A final summarizes the list of supporting 
letters received.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 - Page 6 of 70 
1.1.1. Objective 
 
Overall objective 
SUSTAINEXT main general objective is to scale up and validate a first -of-its-kind industrial facility based on the 
integration of the whole supply chain - from feedstock providers to product’s end -users - applying a disruptive 
circular model integrated in a dynamic biorefinery, to achieve the complete valorisation of sustainably sourced 
feedstocks (industrial by-products olive, artichoke and pomegranate and medicinal and aromatic pants camomile, 
rosemary, and lemon verbena), with a zero-waste and zero-emissions ambition to deliver 46 plant-based healthy 
extracts and functional ingredients, while transforming a region with an outdated cropping system into a cutting 
edge bio-based circular referent. 
Specific objectives 
- SO1: To consolidate a close collaboration link with the agri -food industry to establish a solid 
supply chain for the upcycling of agro-industrial side streams.  
Means of 
verification 
WP1 
Partial objectives 
- To scale, optimize and validate at TRL 8 rosemary, lemon verbena and camomile crops 
cultivation at a hectare scale in disused tobacco fields. KPI: Each plant:  Production of 6 
batches/2MT each 
- To scale, optimize and validate at TRL 8 rosemary crops in agrivoltaics. KPI:  Production of 
6 batches/2MT each 
- To establish a stable and sustainable supply of aerial part of cardoon from DOP ‘Torta del 
Casar’. KPI:  Production of 6 batches/1MT each  
- To demonstrate at TRL -8 the relevance of applying pre -treatments on the feedstocks to 
modulate the FSI and their impact in the value chain.  KPI, improvement of 50% FSI 
D1.1 
to D1.8 
Milesto
ne  
M6 and 
M10 
SO2: To deploy a large scale (TRL 8) unique smart dynamic disruptive and multi -product digital 
biorefinery  
Means of 
verification 
WP2 
 
Partial objectives - To achieve 6,000 -ton production capacity in a new polyphenol plant. KPI:  10 batches of 
polyphenols produced with target quality. 
- To achieve 10,000 -ton production capacity in triterpenoids unit.  KPI: 10 batches of 
triterpenoids produced. 
- To validate sensors performance (bioactive compounds monitoring in extractor and alcohol 
degree in concentration). KPI:  Sensor results within 7 % margin compared to state-of-the-
art analysis. 
D2.1 to 
D2.6 
Milesto
ne 
M4 and 
M6 
SO3: Validate and qualify at industrial scale the integration of 12 VR that enable obtaining 46 plant-
based healthy extracts and functional ingredients from 6 feedstocks  
Means of 
verification 
 
 
 
WP2 
WP3 
 
Partial objectives 
- To qualify at large-scale, innovative extraction and purification technologies and processes 
to obtain 46 plant -based healthy extracts and functional ingredients. KPI:  More than 40 
products obtained at TRL8 
- To complete and qualify each of the 12 VR designed to maximise the total extracted value 
from 6 sustainable sources of feedstocks: KPI:  12 VR qualified at TRL8 
- Demonstrate how the modulation of the FSI of the feedstocks by applying pre-treatments 
and optimized cultivation techniques can increase their utilisation, profitability and 
energetic efficiency in the different VR based on the dynamic analysis model.  KPI:  Each 
feedstock increases profitability 50% and reduce 50% energy Vs current situation 
D3.7 to 
D.3.12 
Milesto
ne 
M9 and 
M11 
SO4: To deliver 12 tailormade formulations according to end-users and market needs. 
Means of 
verification 
WP4 
 
Partial 
objective
s 
- To demonstrate the market uptake by end-users developing final products for the markets 
of food supplements, food ingredients, feed for pets and farm animals, cosmetic products, 
bio-based fertilizers and performance chemicals.  KPI:  40 new products/formula tions 
prototypes developed by end-users and 12 ready to market 
Milesto
ne M12 
D4.1 to 
D4.10 
SO5: To demonstrate the climate change mitigation and zero-waste, zero-pollution ambition.  
Means of 
verification 
All 
WPs 
Partial Objectives To demonstrate the carbon footprint reduction of developed products. KPI:  12 LCAs of each 
VR performed. 
- To enforce a sustainable use and protection of water, maximizing the recirculation of water 
in the industrial processes. KPI: 80% water reused 
- To achieve Zero Net emissions KPI: 100% green energy produced.  
- To demonstrate the effective reduction of pollutant emissions - air, water, soil and noise- 
by validating integrated monitoring and reporting systems. KPI: 80% of pollutant reduction. 
D.5.2 
D.2.7 
 
 
 - Page 7 of 70 
SO6: To maximize the impact and exploitation of the project, and to maximize the social 
dimension and public awareness towards the utilization of the feedstocks. 
Means of 
verification 
WP3
WP6 
WP7 
 
- To implement industrial symbiosis KPI:  8 new industrial symbiosis 
- To promote public awareness and acceptance of bio -based solutions KPI: 25,000 target 
audience reached (D&C actions).   
D6.1 to 
D6.6 
 
D.3.13 
 
D.6.7 
to 
D.6.10 
Partial objectives 
- To promote flagship social acceptance within the community (Extremadura) KPI 4 Open 
Doors Days to DYANA biorefinery. 4 Project local D&C actions. 
- To promote public awareness and acceptance of bio -based solutions KPI: 25,000 target 
audience reached (D&C actions).   
- To Demonstrate the replicability of the zero -waste biorefinery concept. KPI: 10 internal 
replications (6 feedstocks form different origins + 4 new feedstocks); 4 externals proofs of 
concept (2 new feedstocks, 2 new origins) 
- To implement the multi-actor approach with stakeholders from the whole value chain KPI: 
5 co-creation events (materiality assessment) performed during project implementation. 
- To integrate gender perspective into the content of this project. KPI: At least 40 % female 
participants in surveys, multi-actor approach events, etc 
- To pave the way for market uptake of SUSTAINEXT products KPI: 200 potential clients 
contacted, and products presented.  
 
1.1.2. Beyond the state-of-the-art 
 
TOWARDS AN OPTIMIZED FEEDSTOCK SUITABILITY 
i) Current use of feedstocks in the European industry, state -of-the-art:  MAPs traditional cultivation systems do 
not establish a relationship between the cultivated crop and its phytochemical profile. Cultivation practices are 
not optimized to the industry’s needs for the plant material to fulfil determined quality parameters, and many of 
these plants are even still harvested wild. Moreover, during processing, usually only a selected part of the plant is 
used, for example its flowers, leaves, rhizome, etc., and the rest of the plant is discarded in the field as a residue. 
On another side, agro -industrial biomasses including olive, artichoke and pomegranate residues are currently  
underexploited, partially because of their variable composition that mai nly occurs from the way these industrial 
subproducts are processed and stored causing degradation of the phytochemical compounds of interest.   
 
i) SUSTAINEXT advance beyond state-of-the-art:  SUSTAINEXT will optimize and scale up the farming conditions of 
each crop with a strategy to increase the bioactive compounds of interest and obtain cost-effective feedstocks of 
higher quality. Additionally, applying modern, innovative agricultural practises like agrivoltaic cultivation and crop 
rotation will signific antly strengthen sustainability. Sustainably sourced feedstocks of higher quality will directly 
contribute to increased production yields and enhanced resource efficiency. Furthermore, a Dynamic Analysis will 
adapt the downstream processing of feedstocks t o determined products according to the varying quality of the 
feedstock to allow maximal utilisation regardless of initial quality.  SUSTAINEXT will demonstrate that it is indeed 
possible to deploy a sustainable model for exploitation of agricultural side-streams and industrial by-products.    
ii) Feedstock pre -treatments, s tate-of-the-art: Pre-treatments to modulate the phytochemical composition of 
MAPs and agro-industrial biomasses are not employed in the industry today.     
 
ii) SUSTAINEXT advance beyond state-of-the-art: The upscaling of previously developed pre-treatments will enable 
modulation of the phytochemical composition of the feedstock, and consequently, modification of the feedstock 
suitability index ( FSI). This in turn, will generate more suitable feedstocks for the VRs and allow considerable 
reduction in volume of the required inputs, resulting in higher resource efficiency, as explained in Section 1.2.   
SUSTAINEXT MAIN GROUND-BREAKING AND ADVANCES 
Novel concept for sustainably sourced feedstock availability, supply, logistics and processability: SUSTAINEXT will 
apply previously developed know-how and technologies to modulate the phytochemical composition of both the 
MAPs and the agro -industrial feedstocks to enable modification of the SPs and, accordingly, the FSI. All these 
factors combined result in the development of a novel model that uses sustainably-sourced superior feedstocks. 
BIOREFINERY: INTEGRATING TECHNOLOGIES FROM LINEAR TO CASCADE 

 
 
 - Page 8 of 70 
i) Linear process flows focused on the generation of a single product, state-of-the-art: The European plant-based 
ingredients industry, composed of more than 500 companies 11, follows a linear feedstock processing workflow 
that terminates in the generation of a single product – ‘mono-product focused linear model’. In this model, a high 
percentage of the biomass, usually between 60-80%, is discarded as a non-extractable residue after extraction and 
treated as waste, wasting its potential to convert it in a valuable source for other bio-based products. 
 
Figure 1.3 Mono-product focused linear production model 
To make things worse, in some occasions, if the established minimal quality needed of the feedstock is not fulfilled 
the whole harvest is rejected by the industry . At present, NATAC’s modern production plant is equipped with 
technological systems for polyphenols extraction by percolation, purification of water -soluble polyphenols and 
installations for concentration, sterilization, drying and conditioning of the final product. In Europe, the most 
commonly used extraction technique is percolation. Similarly, various technologies are applied for concentrating 
extracts and isolating pure compounds, like tangential filtration, chromatography, crystallization, etc. However, 
these technologies have never been integrated together in a sustainable, dynamic and cascade -based multi -
product model. Additionally, current production plants lack real -time monitorization technologies, for example, 
sensors that quantify the concentration of determined phytochemicals while they are being extracted, or sensors 
that monitor ethanol levels during liquid phase concentration processes. Just as well, they lack real -time 
monitorization and control of emissions.   
i) SUSTAINEXT  advance beyond state -of-the-art: SUSTAINEXT will specifically design four new technological 
structures that will be completely integrated and adapted  to the technological systems already at place in the 
production plant: a) new polyphenol plant extraction : to complement the current technologies of the p lant and 
increment their versatility by including extractions with micronized plants with high swelling indices that hinder 
their extraction by percolation; b) a unit for purifying ethanol -soluble polyphenols: characterized by tangential 
filtration and chromatography to complement the current purification systems for water -soluble polyphenols; c) 
a unit for isolation of triterpenoids: merging technological systems for: extraction, decolorization, concentrators, 
centrifuges, maturation units, differential solubility purification units, crystallization systems, dryers. This third unit 
will complement all previous technologies and enable the purification of practically any phytochemical compound 
of interest; d) Dynamic Analysis: SUSTAINEXT will industrially deploy a novel manufacturing model, where the 
feedstock suitability for each valorisation route – feedstock suitability index – can be modified and directed. This 
model will allow to modulate the feedstock composition (FSI) in such a way so it can be directed towards specific 
downstream processing (VR) to fulfil the market demands at each moment. The Dynamic Analysis will take into 
account this FSI to allot the most resource efficient manner of processing the biomass within its respective VR.  
Integrating these four technologies with the ones already in place in NATAC’s production plant will enable the 
launching of a first -of-its-kind, smart,  dynamic biorefining process for the cascade valorisation of feedstocks. 
Finally, implementing sensor technologies for real-time monitorization of the concentration of active compounds 
or ethanol will mark major improvements in idle times, production yields and efficient energy use. Monitorization 
and control of emissions, air, water and noise, in real time will greatly bring us closer to our zero-emission ambition.  
SUSTAINEXT MAIN GROUND-BREAKING AND ADVANCES 
Novel concept for innovative downstream processes and VR . SUSTAINEXT will include the specific design and 
integration of four new technologies that enable great versatility in extraction and purification of a wide range of 
phytochemicals. Additionally, the inclusion of the concepts of SP, VR, and Dynamic Analysis will convert this plant 
in an innovative and sustainable biorefinery model and elevate it as the most progressive one in Europe.  
 
MAXIMUM VALUE PLANT-BASED EXTRACTS: FROM MONO TO MULTIPRODUCT CASCADE 
i) Mono-product industrial process, state-of-the-art: The European industry is dominated by manufacturers that 
primarily use MAPs, and in certain cases some agro-industrial biomasses, for producing a single product – a mono-
product focused linear model. Sometimes, as is the case of the essen tial oils industry, more than 95% of the 
cultivated plant is discarded as a residue and only 2 -3% of the initial feedstock is utilized. In SUSTAINEXT, six 
 
11 https://www.vitafoods.eu.com/en/exhibitor-list.html  

 
 
 - Page 9 of 70 
feedstocks will be employed – olive, artichoke, pomegranate, rosemary, lemon verbena and camomile – used by 
NATAC today to obtain 11 products in a linear model and discard 80% of the biomass as a residue after processing. 
 
i) SUSTAINEXT advance beyond state-of-the-art: SUSTAINEXT will transform the classical mono-product model in 
a multi-product model. To do so, we will rely on the technologies detailed in the previous section, essential for 
establishing 12 multi-product VRs for processing 6 feedstocks and obtaining 46 plant -based healthy extracts and 
functional ingredients to be commercialized in the B2B market. In essence, we will construct a new biorefinery 
implementing the required technologies that enable obtaining 46 plant-based products from 6 feedstocks instead 
of the 11 products being produced at present, employing a more sustainable, innovative and efficient model. 
ii) A sector stagnated with industrial practices from 40 years ago, s tate-of-the-art: It is surprising, but the herbal 
extracts European industry follows the same industrial practices today as 40 years ago. The basic concept of 
obtaining between 30 to 200 kg of extract from 1000 kg of plant material and discard the residual 800 -970 kg is 
an outdated practice that still dominates the market. 
 
ii) SUSTAINEXT advance beyond state-of-the-art: SUSTAINEXT will completely utilise the feedstocks leaving zero 
residue. In SUSTAINEXT, the 6 employed feedstocks will be converted in 46 plant -based healthy extracts and 
functional ingredients out of which 13 are  totally new on the market and 12 are newly produced in Europe 
(currently imported from APAC, mainly China). 24 of these ingredients belong to the extensive polyphenol family, 
14 are terpenoids and the rest to other chemical families. SUSTAINEXT will bring to the market bio-based products 
highly competitive in price, of elevated quality and obtained in a particularly sustainable model.  
SUSTAINEXT MAIN GROUND-BREAKING AND ADVANCES 
A total of 46 new bioproducts – plant-based ingredients for the B2B market – will be produced in the new 
biorefinery: 22 already produced in Europe in a linear and non -sustainable model; 12 fabricated in China and 13 
completely new. This distribution will permit a rapid entry in the market, with sales from the first month of 
production considering the products already established on the market, and at the same time carrying a pipeline 
of innovative products to achieve a clear differentiation in the market. 
 
PATENTS 
During the preparation of this proposal, the consortium has evaluated if the innovation can be further developed 
and potentially commercialised in the EU without infringing the valid intellectual property rights of others. To 
assure the project's freedom to operate, the possibility of the existence of innovations that could potentially hinder 
the commercialisation and exploitation landscape have been explored. A patent mapping search was performed 
in the database SciFINDER and ESPACENET to identify patents in Europe regarding technological processes and 
plant-based extracts from olive (293), artichoke (1409), pomegranate (757), rosemary (1492), lemon verbena (28) 
and camomile (194). For each one, the analysis assessed whether the multi-product and cascaded processes were 
protected in either of the patents. In this preliminary assessment, it was possible to confirm that SUSTAINEXT has 
the freedom to operate in this process since it does not infringe any currently valid IP rights .  In relation to the 
product specifications, the result was similar. On another side, NATAC is the proprietary of patents that protect 
the combination of olive triterpenes with polyphenols from olive and lemon verbena (P2813221) that act 
synergistically in controlling chronic inflammation, applicable in the markets of nutraceuticals, feed and cosmetics.   
 
1.1.3. R&I maturity 
 
WP1: Feedstock: Upscale of crops, agrivoltaics, biomass & pre-treatments Ending TRL 
Olive (NATAC and INNO): leaves for VR-1 and VR-2 with FSI>0,7 have already been 
obtained at MT scale; OMWWs have been matured in the range of hectolitres; olive 
skin has been obtained at MT scale. All the processes have been completed at TRL6. 
TRL 8 completed, and 
processes qualified (6 
batches/each) 
Artichoke (AGROS, CTAEX, DOP): Artichoke pre-treated with steam blanching has 
been demonstrated at TRL6. Cardoon has been cultivated in 4 Ha. The aerial part of 
artichoke has been collected in 3 Ha of farmland (FSI>0,7) Yield in dry biomass is 
about 18 t/Ha. Cultivation has been performed in real operative environment. 
TRL 8 completed, and 
processes qualified (6 
industrial batches/each) 
Pomegranate (AGROS): Pomegranate peel has been conditioned and stabilized by 
drying in a 2MT scale (FSI>0,7) TRL6 completed. 
TRL 8 processes qualified 
(6 industrial batches) 
PAM crops (ENEL, CTAEX, TABEX, INP): Rosemary has been cultivated in 3 Ha of 
agrivoltaic, and in 4 Ha in tobacco cultivation zones. Yield rosemary dry weight 
1000-1500 kg/Ha. Camomile and lemon verbena have been cultivated in tobacco 
cultivation zones: 4 Ha for camomile and 3 Ha lemon verbena. Yield 1000 kg/ha dry 
weight (both). Cultivation has been performed in real operative environment. 
TRL 8 crops qualified, 6 
batches/each in different 
years and lands 
 
 
 - Page 10 of 70 
WP2: Biorefinery Design & Construction; Extraction and Purification Technologies Ending TRL 
New polyphenol extraction plant (NATAC): this process has been tried in industrial 
ambient at TRL 6 employing micronized plant in continuous agitation with 
temperature control and separation by centrifugation, finishing at TRL 6 
TRL 8 completed with 3 
batches of each of 12 VR 
Purification unit for phytochemicals soluble in ethanol (NATAC): Purification trials 
have been carried out in tangential flow pilot equipment and industrial scale 
chromatography systems. Work has not been conducted with both units integrated 
in a row. TRL 6 completed. 
TRL 8 completed with 3 
batches of each of 12 VR 
Unit for extraction and purification of terpenes (NATAC, INNO): INNO has a 
demonstration plant for purification of triterpenes with the principal technologies 
integrated in the system, but it has been designed to only obtain oleanolic 97%, 
without harnessing the side streams and purifications in cascade. TRL 6 finished 
TRL 8 completed with 3 
batches of each of VR2; 
VR3, VR8, VR8, VR10 
Sensor technologies (IRIS): sensors to monitor contamination are already available. 
Sensors to quantify polyphenols and measure the alcohol level in real-time will be 
developed by IRIS using the results of project AGRIMAX 12. TRL 6 completed. 
TRL 8 completed, and 
sensors qualified in real 
time conditions 
WP3: Bioproducts: Plant-based healthy extracts and functional ingredients for B2B 
market Ending TRL 
Valorisation Routes VR-1 to VR12 (NATAC): Each one of the 12 VR has been entirely 
completed in a TRL 6 industrial ambient, obtaining 46 plant-based extracts in total 
that comply with the required specifications. TRL 6 completed. 
TRL 8 completed; 12 VR 
qualified with 3 batches 
each 
WP4: End users; product applications Ending TRL 
End users (STAR, ACEL, AGROS, MIAVIT, MBL, NUT, BIOM): end users within the 
consortium have ready-to-use product development technologies that will need to 
be validated at TRL 8 with new ingredients.  TRL 6 completed. 
TRL 8 completed, at least 
12 end products ready to 
market 
 
1.1.4. Synergies with other projects 
A full review of ongoing and finalised projects has been conducted to seek for complementarity and synergies. 
However, overlapping will not be a risk, given that SUSTAINEXT aims to reach TRL 8 and none of the analysed projects 
have reached industrial scale.  
 
Previously funded BBI flagships: The SUSTAINEXT concept has not yet been addressed in any of the previously funded 
projects. Previous flagships were focused in the following areas: Proteins production from wheat (PLENITUDE), 
valorisation of dairy bioma ss (AgriChemWhey), non -food biomass to produce chemicals (AFTERBIOCHEM), insects 
biorefinery (FARMYNG), cellulose biomass (ReSolute, EXILVA), production of chemical building blocks (PEFerence), 
wood biomass (SWEETWOODS), lignocellulosic biorefining (BIOSKO H, LIGNOFLAG, VIOBOND), microalgae (SCALE) 
and municipal solid waste biorefinery (CIRCULAR BIOCARBON). The only agro-industrial biomass employed so far in 
a flagship was cardoon (FIRST2RUN). This project has served as example of a cascade approach and repr esents a 
good step towards plant biorefining. However, SUSTAINEXT seeks to scale a disruptive concept based on smart 
dynamic biorefining and with a carbon neutrality ambition. 
 
SUSTAINEXT background: Two previously funded projects are the background of MAP s cultivation in Extremadura: 
GLOBALPAM (EIP-AGRI Regional Operational Group) and PAMQ (regional funds). Natac, CTAEX, TABEX collaborated 
with the aim to lay the foundations and boost the market for MAPs in Extremadura. GO-CYNARA (EIP-AGRI Regional 
Operational Group) sets the basis for cardoon farming to produce the ‘Torta del Casar’ cheese, where Natac and DOP 
have actively participated in the project.  OLEAF4VALUE (BBI-JU H2020 GA 101023256)  is an ongoing project 
coordinated by Natac in which new innovative technologies for olive biorefinery are developed. AGRIMAX (BBI-JU 
H2020 GA 720719) coordinated by IRIS. Valorisation of agricultural residues and side streams from the agro -food 
industry) Such a project created the basis of one of the biggest knowledge databases for the creation and delivery of 
biorefineries that are operating successfully at this stage in Europe. SUSTAINEXT would be for IRIS the next level of 
involvement into that sector, br inging into the market the overall knowhow and experience on digitising process 
industries and bringing cutting edge monitoring techniques to ensure efficiency and quality on the digital process 
monitoring. Besides, in section A of the proposal a relation can be found with other previously funded projects that 
somehow serve as background of partners to address the SUSTAINEXT goals (see section 1.2.5). 
 
 
 
 
 
12 https://agrimax.iris-eng.com/ 
 
 
 - Page 11 of 70 
1.2. Methodology  
 
Figure 1.4 Overall concept of the SUSTAINEXT model 
 
1.2.1. Overall methodology  
The four principal concepts built in our Smart Dynamic Analytical Biorefinery (DYANA) will be analysed in this section: 
i) Feedstocks and pre-treatments; ii) Integrating extraction and purification technologies to establish a muti flow to 
be implemented in the new biorefinery; iii) Plant-based healthy extracts and functional ingredients for B2B market; 
iv) End products for different markets 
 
I.- Feedstocks and Pre-Treatments (WP 1) 
Three main notions will be defined in this secrion: a) feedstocks; b) Suitability Parameters, Feedstock Suitability Index 
and Dynamic Analysis; c) Pre-treatments.  
 
a) Feedstocks 
In SUSTAINEXT, six feedstocks will be used: three agro-industrial biomasses and three sustainably cultivated plants. 
The versatility of the selected feedstocks will demonstrate that the developed model is replicable for many other 
types of feedstocks, including feedstocks originating from other locations: 
 
OLIVE 
Olive biomass will be supplied by INNO, a JV between Natac Group and Oleicola El Tejar ( the biggest 
olive biomass operator in the world: a second-degree cooperative with 250 mills and 120,000 farmers 
behind, that manages 15% of total olive biomass worldwide). S everal by-products are generated by 
the olive industry: i) olive pomace, a by -product that is usually reprocessed by companies specialized in the 
production of olive pomace oil, consequently out of SUSTAINEXT; ii) olive mil wastewaters (OMWW); iii) olive 
leaves; and iv) olive pits, of which the olive fruit skins can be separated, and the clean pits can be directed for 
energy production. Olive leaves, OMWW and olive fruit skin will be used in SUSTAINEXT. 

 
 
 Page 12 of 70 
ARTICHOKE 
Cynara scolymus L. is the botanical name of the plant artichoke. During the industrial processing, the 
external leaves of the artichoke buds called bracts are eliminated and reprocessed as an agro -
industrial waste. In SUSTAINEXT, AGROS will collect and stabilize this by -product and convert it in a 
feedstock for manufacturing high added -value products. Similarly, at the end of the harvest, the rest of the 
artichoke plant is abandoned in the fields, and it will be collected by AGROS. Thirdly, there is variety of the plant 
Cynara scolymus L. called cardoon, with a flower used for curdling in the Designation of Origin (PDO) cheese ‘Torta 
del Casar’ (Cáceres) to produce one of the most unique and renowned cheeses of the Community of Extremadura. 
 
CTAEX, DOP and NATAC have been collaborating in the project GO-CYNARA to domesticate this wild plant, attain 
its controlled cultivation and develop mechanized recollection of the flower. Last year, the consortium was able 
to grow the crop in a cultivation zone of 4 Ha. Once the plant is grown and the flower collected, the aerial part of 
the plant does not have any current value and is usually abandoned in the field. In SUSTAINEXT, this third non -
utilized by-product will also be employed as a feedstock for obtaining added-value products. In summary, rejected 
artichoke bracts, artichoke plant left in the fields and the aerial part of the wild cardoon will be used in SUSTAINEXT.    
POMEGRANATE 
Food industry produces pomegranate juice, generating two main waste products in the process: 
pomegranate peel and pomegranate pulp with seeds. Seeds are used to obtain pomegranate seed 
oil. Nevertheless, the pomegranate peel does not have any value now and is normally processed as 
a waste. AGROS will stabilize and pre -condition pomegranate peel residues from the food industry 
to prepare this biomass for its subsequent processing in SUSTAINEXT. 
MAPs - ROSEMARY, CAMOMILE and LEMON VERBENA 
These three MAPs have been successfully cultivated by CTAEX, TABEX, INP and ENEL in the 
Community of Extremadura and will be employed in the SUSTAINEXT project as feedstocks.  
 
Agrivoltaics is the symbiosis between photovoltaic solar installations and the agricultural sector, 
meeting the energy demand in a world with limited land and resources facing an increasing demand 
for food and agricultural consumption. In the last two years, CTAEX and ENEL have worked on cultivating rosemary 
in agrivoltaics. Studies of the phytochemical composition of rosemary grown in these conditions showed that 
agrivoltaic rosemary has a different phytochemical profile, richer in diterpene compounds, compared to rosemary 
from traditional irrigated cultivation, and has a higher percentage of phenolic compounds. In the SUSTAINEXT 
project, a network of agricultural and energy performance sensors will be installed in the agrivoltaics crops to 
collect all the data measurements and send all the information in real time. 
 
Alternatives for tobacco cultivation: TABEX is an agricultural cooperative working mainly on tobacco cultivation. In 
the last years, the economic viability of tobacco cultivation is in question. As a result , the search for alternative 
crops to be cultivated in these fields is urgent. TABEX, CTAEX, INP, STAR and NATAC collaborated in two R&D 
projects that demonstrated the cultivation of various MAPs as alternatives to tobacco. The most successful results 
were obtained for: rosemary, camomile, and lemon verbena. These three MAPs will be sustainably cultivated by 
TABEX, CTAEX and INP and used in SUSTAINEXT. Moreover, cultivation in different areas will serve as an example 
of how MAPs crops represent a new opportunity in the future. In fact, new collaboration projects between these 
partners have continued investigating the sustainable cultivation of other MAPs, including, echinacea, nettle, 
valerian and melissa. These plants can become potential candidates of new feedstocks that can be incorporated 
in the workflows of the flagship SUSTAINEXT, further demonstrating the replicability of the model.  
Digital technologies including soil and environmental sensor analysis and satellite images will be used to control 
and monitor MAPs cultivation. 
 
b) Suitability Parameters (SP), Feedstock Suitability Index (FSI) and Dynamic Analysis (DA) 
 
Suitability Parameters (SP) 
A Suitability Parameter (SP) is an intrinsic property of the feedstock (for example, colour, humidity, content of a 
specific phytochemical) that is identified by the biorefinery as relevant for the downstream transformation of the 
feedstock into value -added products. Our previous rese arch has allowed us to identify the main SPs that every 
feedstock should fulfil so its quality will be perceived as optimal for the downstream processing through one of 
the Valorisation Routes (VR). A specified set of SPs individual to each feedstock is taken into consideration for the 
calculation of a Feedstock Suitability Index (FSI), a number whose value gives information on the suitability of the 
feedstock batch for its downstream processing through a pre-defined VR. 
   

 
 
 Page 13 of 70 
Feedstock Suitability Index (FSI) 
FSI is a numerical quantifier expressing the overall suitability of a given feedstock for a specific Valorisation Route 
(VR). It has a value varying from 0 (not suitable) to 1 (perfectly suitable) that is computed based on predefined SPs 
measured directly on different feedstock batches. The FSI corresponds to the weighted average of the normalized 
SPs, where specific importance (weight) of a given  SP is pre-defined by the relevant biorefinery.  The higher the 
FSI, the higher the obtained yield for high value -added products -determined by Dynamic Analysis -. Therefore, 
feedstocks with higher FSIs are more appropriate raw materials for the advanced levels of the downstream 
processing (further down the line in the workflow) in a determined VR to obtain more concentrated bioproducts.  
 
Dynamic Analysis (DA) 
Dynamic Analysis allots the most resource efficient manner of processing the biomass within the same VR. The FSI 
will be calculated from the weighted average of each SP related to the feedstock. For example, the olive leaf has 
two different VRs in this project. For VR-1, the SPs of importance are total polyphenols content, oleuropein, 
humidity, colour, benzopyrenes, pesticides and pyrrolizidine alkaloids, while the SPs for VR-2 are: total triterpenes, 
oleanolic acid, ratio oleanolic/maslinic acid, total polyphenols and colour. The FSI generated for each of these two 
VRs is complementary, i.e., when FSI-1 is high, FSI-2 is low, and vice 
versa. This is a result of the specific weight of the determined SPs in the 
calculation of the final FSI for each VR. Similar examples can be give n 
for the artichoke and rosemary. Additional to this, and for all VR, the 
value of the FSI will indicate the suitability of the feedstock batch to 
prioritize the production of one product over another within the same 
VR. To explain, batches with higher FSI will be prioritized to go farther 
in the VR (produce higher concentrated products) than batches with 
lower FSI which will be directed in the Dynamic Analysis to produce 
less concentrated products (less far in VR).  
 
 
c) Pre-treatments to modulate the FSI 
Research activities conducted up to this date have allowed us to define several processes and pre -treatments with 
the ability to modify the FSI and condition the feedstock into a more suitable biomass for processing in an VR. 
 
Pre-treatments to tune the Su itability Parameters: Pre-treatments developed by NATAC in previous projects that 
have been demonstrated at TRL 6 include: 
- Olive leaves pre-treatment I: thermically pre-treating fresh olive leaves with temperatures of 100 -120ºC during 
10-20 min, increases the extractable concentration of oleuropein in the leaves from 0,5% to up to 14% (p/p).  
- Olive leaves pre-treatment II:  the storage and maturation of olive leaves in big biomass piles enables the almost 
complete elimination of polyphenols and chlorophylls due to natural degradation and preconditions the olive leaf 
biomass in the most suitable feedstock for isolation of triterpenic acids and purification of oleanolic acid.  
- OMWW:  the maturation by storage in controlled conditions, followed by a concentration process and 
microfiltration increases the concentration of hydroxytyrosol from 2 to 15 g/L.  
- Olive fruit skin: Unlike the olive seeds, olive fruit skin is a rich source of triterpenic acids, especially maslinic acid. 
Applying a cleaning pre -treatment that adequately separates the olive skin from the seeds results in a better 
conditioned feedstock for producing maslinic acid bioproducts. Moreover, the se parated seeds will be directed 
to the biomass boiler to be used as a biomass energy resource. 
- Artichoke bracts: treating the artichoke bracts with steam blanching during 10 min increases the concentration 
of caffeoylquinic acids from 1,5% to 5%. 
- Rosemary: thermically treating rosemary with temperatures of 60-70ºC during 45 min modifies the ratio carnosic 
acid/carnosol from 0.3 to 6.3, modulating the FSI towards carnosic acid isolation route. 
Pre-treatments to stabilize the feedstocks and optimize logistics costs: cutting, micronization and palletization 
increase the bulk density of the biomass, reducing transport and storage costs while increasing the extraction 
capacity and improving sustainability at the same time. The new biorefinery will be equipped with  specialized 
extractors able to utilize feedstocks pre -stabilized by these pre-treatments, for example micronized plant material. 
These pre-treatments will be performed at the biomass origin by AGROS, TABEX, CTAEX and INNOV as necessary. 
Drying of the MAPs will be carried out in big tobacco dryers available to TABEX. These dryers are specialized, technical 
installations that are larg ely underused during the year. With the upcoming extinction of tobacco cultivation, we 
could offer an alternative use to these machines, avoid their decommissioning, and prevent job losses.   
 
 
 
Figure 1.5 Product allotment in VR-1 for olive leaf 
biomasses of different qualities: FSI 0.4 and FSI 0.9 

 
 
 Page 14 of 70 
Summary of New Methodologies Related to SP, FSI, DA 
The methodology for classifying a given feedstock according to the concept of a Feedstock Suitability Index (FSI) 
and the capability to influence this index by applying pre-treatments for guiding the downstream processing of the 
feedstock to the most appropriate Valorisation Route (VR) according to its composition and/or towards fabrication 
processes more optimized f or obtaining a desired product within the same VR after a Dynamic Analysis, is 
completely new in the European herbal extracts production industry.   
 
II.- Integrating Technologies. From Linear to Cascade (WP2) 
In 2021, NATAC finished the construction of its production facility with a total investment of 13.5 M€ 
(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0QFiTBSLNHc). The plant has been constructed on an area of 20.000 m2, has a 
current maximum processing capacity of 3,000 MT feedstock/year. Up to date, this plant has created more than 40 
direct qualified job positions. It is a production facility constructed with innovative extraction and purification 
technologies for the fabrication of various botanical ingredients. A production facility that today can be considered 
one of the single most efficient botanical ingredient factories in Europe. The current plant – (Fig 1.6) is equipped with 
modern extraction technologies for the extraction of polyphenolic compounds, composed of units for: extraction by 
percolation, concentration, ethanol rectification, sterilization, drying and product conditioning in clean rooms. 
Besides, a second unit for water-soluble polyphenols purification is also available.   
In SUSTAINEXT, new 
technologies will be 
incorporated complementary 
to the ones in place, to endow 
the plant with maximal 
versatility and capacity to 
extract highly diverse 
phytochemical compounds 
and conduct purifications and 
isolations of a wide range of 
phytochemical compounds of 
different chemical nature.   
The SUSTAINEXT project aims 
to terminate in the launching 
of a first-of-its-kind European flagship biorefinery, to serve as a reference model in the European sector of botanical 
ingredient producers as a technologically -advanced, circular, sustainable and digital by design biorefinery. A 
biorefinery with the capacity of manufacturing a wide range of high added-value bio-based products and where the 
components of replicability and versatility have been prioritized in the design of the equipment and technological 
processes. The new production facility will extend the current plant to a total area of 30.000 m2 (including the 20.000 
m2 from current plant; see Fig 1.6).  
Below, the following methodologies are described: a) technologies to be implemented for obtaining plant -based 
healthy extracts and functional ingredients; b) technologies to be implemented to advance towards zero-waste and 
zero-emission ambition; c) technologies for digitalization. 
b) New technologies complementary to the ones in place to convert the factory in a first-of-its-kind Smart Dynamic 
Analytical Biorefinery (DYANA) 
- New polyphenol extraction plant: Even though percolation is one of the most applied technologies in the industry, 
certain feedstocks present problems when this technique is used due to their high swelling index. In other 
occasions, especially when the material to be extracted is of ligneous nature, the classical percolation takes longer 
than desired. To surpass both obstacles, a new extraction technology able to use micronized material will be 
incorporated that will improve the extraction efficiency with water as a solvent and hydroalcoholic mixtures with 
low alcohol grade. This technology will complement perfectly the current technology available in the polyphenols 
plant and significantly enhance the plant’s versatility.   
-  Purification unit for polyphenols soluble in ethanol: a unit complementary to the systems of the Water Polyphenol 
Plant (Fig 1.6) that applies Tangential Flow Filtration (TFF) technologies and purification approaches with 
adsorption resins adapted for the purification of polyphenols in various VRs described in SUSTAINEXT.  
- Sensor technologies: (see digitalization section below): quantification of active compounds in the extractor  and 
alcohol content measurement during concentration enable more efficient use of the equipment by providing real-
time information of the state of the process. 
Figure 1.6 Current production facility of NATAC and extensions planned with SUSTAINEXT 
 
 
 Page 15 of 70 
- Unit for extraction and purification of terpenes and other plant -based extracts at high ratios : Design and 
construction of a new extraction unit wit h high extraction efficiencies at ratios up to 100:1, meaning, using 100 
kg of plant to obtain 1 kg of bioproduct. Parallel design of the downstream processing technologies for purification 
in cascade and exploitation of the side streams. Incorporation of technological units for separation and 
purification of terpenoids: concentrators, centrifugates, maturation units, differential solubility purification units, 
crystallization systems, dryers. This design is based on INNO’s demonstration plant, currently TRL 6/7.  
 
Summary of Integrated Methodologies for DYANA: From Linear to Cascade 
The new DYANA plant will be converted in a highly versatile production plant with a capacity to perform multi -
product extractions, cascade utilisation of the feedstock and puri fications of phytochemicals of diverse chemical 
nature. In summary, the new DYANA equipment configuration will be: 
- Three extraction technologies: i) the current; ii) new polyphenol extraction unit y iii) triterpenoids extraction 
- Three purification technologies: i) current unit for water-soluble polyphenols; ii) new unit for polyphenols soluble 
in ethanol; iii) new unit for isolation of triterpenoids 
 
c) Technologies towards our zero-waste and zero-emissions ambition  
- State of the art biomass boiler for reutilization of the exhausted feedstocks 
- Reverse osmosis : a reverse osmosis unit will be installed after the WWTS (wastewater treatment station) to 
recover 80% of water used (see section 1.2.4.4). 
- A new and more efficient system for feedstock desolventisation out of extractor: residence time reductions results 
in increased efficacy and less usage time of the equipment – from 180 min to 45 min; higher ethanol recuperation 
rates facilitate the use of exhausted feedstocks for obtaining PFF and biobased fertilizers.  
- Spray dryers, improving re-circulation flows: hot air currents like the ones produced during the process of spray 
drying will be recirculated to heat the inlet air. 
- Air quality : systems for reducing air particles from milling  by capture technologies and air filtration systems; 
filtration systems that completely eliminate particle emissions in the atmosphere and improve the ventilation and 
air renovation in the clean rooms (HEPA filters). 
 
d) Digitalization:   
The digitalization of the flagship SUSTAINEXT will be specifically addressed in the following areas:  
- Data analytics and data management tool of the DYANA Flagship: Full integration between SCADA - collects data 
about all manufacturing parameters-, ERP NAVISION -a system that drives the manufacturing processes- and LIMS 
-Laboratory Information Management System - will be implemented  to ensure high standards of resource 
efficiency and environmental protection. 
- Integrated monitoring and reporting systems on effective reduction of pollutant emissions: The monitoring sensors 
for pollutant emissions will be added to the set of sensors and machines already integrated in the SCADA system 
to obtain real-time information about the emissions. A reporting layer will be created for automatically collecting 
and displaying these data in visualization dashboards and easy to interpret reports for globally monitoring the 
factory reporting. This reporting layer will be developed using the Microsoft PowerBI reporting tool. 
- Digital platform for visualization and analysis of sensory data from the extraction plant (IRIS):  Real-time online 
monitoring will be implemented  for critical process parameters (quantification of active compounds during 
extraction and alcohol level during concentration) using an o ptical NIR spectroscopic analysers  currently 
engineered by IRIS (commercialised under the VISUM® brand). The data will be integrated with a digital platform 
that will be adapted and upscaled from the current Scadalytics® Data Management Platform  that is under 
development in IRIS. Two addit ional state-of-the-art sensors for determination of suspended solids in 
concentration phase and moisture detection in the spray dry chamber will be integrated and validated under 
industrial conditions. The platform also enables connectivity with ERP, MES and SCADA. In this project Scadalytics® 
will be customised, integrated with the selected IR sensors, and will implemented the developed Machine 
Learning and Chemometrics models that will be developed for the present applications, and will be validated 
under industrial conditions (TRL-8). 
- The main monitoring targets for the productive process are quantification of active compounds in the extractor 
and alcohol detection in concentration phase. Real-time online monitoring will be implemented using optical NIR 
technologies already developed by IRIS. Digital platform will be development, integrated and validated under 
industrial conditions (TRL-8). Apart from that, two additional sensors for determination of suspended solids and 
moisture detection in the spray dry chamber will be integrated and validated under industrial conditions. These 
two last sensors have been recently developed by the manufacturers of the current spray dryer and concentrator  
 
 
 Page 16 of 70 
- Dynamic analysis algorithm:  An algorithm will be validated and impl emented to optimize the downstream 
processing of each feedstock. This algorithm will consider a set of variables collected by different systems 
(production parameters, environmental data, customers’ forecasts, existing demand), so the processing can be 
adjusted dynamically in the VR and to suggest the optimum conditions for obtaining the target products. The 
algorithm will consider all the previous input and output data from the past productions to propose a new 
improved route to guarantee the resource efficiency and sustainability of the process. 
- Predictive maintenance & plant engineering ; The maintenance system will be improved to suggest the most 
adequate maintenance of the equipment: schedule the planned maintenance tasks and propose new tasks based 
on the information provided by the SCADA system 
- Digital solutions for providing product information, allow traceability, assessment of sustainability and better 
communication of product information:  An extranet portal accessible by user/password will be created to provide 
information to customers and stakeholders about traceability, specifications, and any other relevant parameters 
for a specific product/batch, as well as other related info, giving transparency about our manufacturing processes, 
full traceability and environmental impact assessments.  
 
III.- Plant-based healthy extracts and functional ingredients:  
Extracting Maximum Value. From Mono to Multiproduct Cascade (WP3) 
Two aspects will be developed: a) Valorisation Routes; and b) Botanicals ingredients for the B2B market. 
 
a) Valorisation routes (VRs) 
In contrast to traditional linear model, the ‘first-of-its-kind multi-circular and sustainable biorefinery model’ proposed 
in the SUSTAINEXT project includes 12 different VRs that enable the production of 46 plant -based healthy extracts 
and functional ingredients, employing innovative technologies and process designs. This highly innovative, circular -
based and sustainable project will upgrade the current linear workflows of the 6 selected feedstocks that are now 
used to produce 11 plant-based extracts, with 12 distinct multi-product valorisation routes that generate 46 plant -
based healthy extracts and functional ingredients by means of fully utilizing the main routes and the generated side 
streams. In Fig 1.7, the present-day linear, mono-product oriented workflows that lead to the fabrication of 11 end-
products from the 6 feedstocks employed in SUSTAINEXT are shown. Henceforth are shown the 12 multi-valorisation 
VRs that will be implemented in this project for the downstream processing of the same six feedst ocks to produce 
46 plant-based healthy extracts and functional ingredients. 
On the next page, a scheme (Fig 1.8) of utilization of the same 6 feedstocks through 12 valorisation routes that enable 
obtaining 46 plant-based healthy extracts and functional ingredients is shown. The mass balances are calculated from 
an assumed FSI=0.7 for each feedstock (the effects produced by FSI variations are presented in section 1.2.1.I-b).      
Figure 1.7 Current fabrication workflows for the utilisation of 6 feedstocks to obtain 11 products and their generation of high 
amounts of waste. A scheme that additionally represents the typical, present-day operations of the botanical ingredients industries 
THE AERIAL 
PART OF 
CARDOON IS 
NOT CURRENTLY 
EXPLOITED 
 
 
 Page 17 of 70 
 
Figure 1.8 The 12 VRs with their respective mainstreams and side streams to be used in SUSTEINEXT for 
processing 6 feedstocks and obtaining 46 plant-based healthy ingredients 
VR-9 
 VR-10 
 VR-11 
 VR-12 
VR-1 
 VR-3 
 VR-4 
VR-5 
 VR-6 
 VR-7 
 VR-8 
VR-2 

 
 
 Page 18 of 70 
In Fig 1.8, the 12 defined VRs with their mainstreams and side streams are presented in detail. The mass balances 
indicated for each VR refer to the quantity of plant -based healthy extracts obtained from 1 MT of plant feedstock, 
considering an FSI of 0.7 in each case. Relating to the extraction technologies, all routes contain basic stages that are 
regularly included in the production of this type of extracts: feedstock conditioning, cutting, solvent extraction, 
separation of the liquid extract from the extracted biomass, desolventisation of the extracted biomass, concentration 
of the liquid extract, sterilization of the concentrated liquid, drying, milling and sieving of the obtained product, and 
finally, packaging. For the products of very high added-value, diverse active compound purification technologies are 
included. All these technologies are mature and do not suppose significant technological risks: differential solubility 
fractionation, tangential filtration, chromatography, crystallisation. 
 
DYANA mass balance Vs current model 
According to figure  1.7, current linear flowchart generates 9,1 MT of wastes (76 %) from processing 12 MT of 
feedstocks (1 MT in each VR). Apart from additional wastes (water, solvents, etc.) DYANA will dramatically improve 
yield and reduce waste. Mass balance analysis for the new DYANA biorefinery in year 5 after the project is shown in 
figure 1.8b.  
 
 
 
Figure 1.8b DYANA mass balance Vs current system 
b) Plant-based healthy extracts and functional ingredients for B2B market: 
In the table below, 46 plant-based healthy extracts and functional ingredients will be obtained in DYANA through the 
12 established VR, out of which 13 are totally new in the world and 12 are newly produced in Europe (currently 
imported from APAC, mainly C hina). 24 of these ingredients belongs to the extensive polyphenol family, 14 are 
terpenoids and the rest to other chemical families. New in the global market;             No made in EU 
 
Table 1.1 Representation of the 46 plant-based healthy extracts and functional ingredients that will be obtained in DYANA 
 Bio-based products Market demand and Justification of selection 
VR-1 Oleuropein 20% Food supplements: Cardiovascular and immune system. Food ingredient: preservative, 
antimicrobial and antioxidant. Feed additives:  concentrations (20%) produced with an 
efficient process to secure competitive market prices.  
VR-1 Oleuropein 40% 
VR-1 Oleuropein 80% 
VR-1 Elenolic acid 
20% 
Food supplements : Immunomodulators. Pharma: antiviral activity. Chemical: Elenolic 
acid is a monoterpene for building blocks. Cosmetic: skincare, skin repair and anti-aging. 
VR-1 Chlorophyll Food colorant , obtained with green extraction technologies, free of organic solvents. 
Others: dye for materials 
several Phytochemical 
Free Fibre (PFF)  
Food ingredient: fibre supplement. Feed material: as a corrector to increase the intake 
of fibre in the diet 
several Biobased fertilizer Biobased fertilizer: to be used as a fertilizer in MAPs cultivation by BIOM 
VR-1 Triterpenoids 15% Feed additive: To control oxidative stress and chronic inflammation 
VR-2 Triterpenes 30  Food supplements, Healthy food, Feed additive:  To control oxidative stress and chronic 
inflammation. NATAC patent, synergistic effect when combined with olive and lemon 
verbena polyphenols VR-2 Triterpenes 60% 
VR-2 OA 90-98% Oleanolic acid (OA). Pharma active ingredients and building blocks for new drugs  
VR-2 Lipidic fraction Food additive & Cosmetic:  emulsifying agent, studies related to antimicrobial and lipid 
oxidation prevention.  
VR-2 Flavonoids 15% Food supplements : Cardiovascular and immune system care Cosmetic: related to 
skincare, skin repair and anti-aging. 
 
Mass Balance for DYANA: Biorefinery 
- Feedstock:    
- Water: 
▪ Re-circulated  
▪ Used:   
- Ethanol:  
▪ Re-circulated 
▪ Used:   
- Green energy * 
▪ kWh  
▪ m3 gas equiv. 
10,000 MT 
100,000 m3 
80% 
20% 
400 m3 
99,5% 
<0,5% 
 
8.000.000 
7.500.000 
- Bioproducts:  
▪ Extracts 
▪ Fertilizers 
▪ Exhausted biomass for Energy  
▪ Clean water** 
 
- Co-products 
▪ Ashes for fertilizers 
▪ Slurries for biogas 
▪ Water for cooling towers *** 
▪ Water re-circulated 
10.000 MT 
3.500 MT 
1,700 MT 
1,700 MT 
3,100 m3 
 
 
73 MT 
180 m3  
20,000 m3 
80,000 m3 
*) obtained by solar panels, biomass boiler (cogeneration); **) clean water obtained from OMWW 
feedstock and re-circulated; ***) water lost by evaporation in the cooling tower 

 
 
 Page 19 of 70 
VR-3 Maslinic 25% Food supplements: gut care due to its anti -inflammatory properties. Feed additives:  
coccidiostatic, gut health. Cosmetic: related to skincare, anti-wrinkle agent. Maslinic 60% 
VR-4 
Polyphenols 5% Food supplements and Health food: Technological antioxidant. Reduces oxidative stress: 
cardiovascular health and healthy aging. Feed additives for gut health and 
immunomodulation in combination with triterpens (patented). Cosmetic: related to 
skincare, reduces and corrects skin spots and imperfections (dark-spot corrector) 
Hydroxytyrosol 20%- 
Hydroxyt. 60% 
VR-4 Fulvic acids 25% Feed additives gut health and immune function Biostimualnt:  rooting, fixates minerals 
and other nutrients increasing the bioavailability of nutrients to the plant  VR-4 Liq. K+ 6% 
   
VR-5, 6, 
7 
Caffeoylquinic acids 
6-12% 
Food supplements and Health food:  Digestive health. Depurative. Feed additives 
Hepatoprotection, digestive health 
VR-5 Cynaroside 5% Food supplements: hepatoprotection. Pets: digestive disorders 
VR-5 Cynaropicrin 3% Food supplements:  Chronic inflammation, antiparasitic, antiviral. Feed additives 
Hepatoprotection, digestive health. Cosmetic: skincare, UV protection.  
VR-6, 7 Chlorogenic 15 Food supplements: Antioxidant, antiradical. Cardiovascular health. Cosmetic: skincare 
VR-6 Cynarine 2%  Food supplements and Health food:  Digestive health. Depurative. Feed additives 
Hepatoprotection, digestive health 
VR-6 Artichoke Inulin 
Food supplements and Health food: Soluble fibre, prebiotic action. Gut health and restau VR-6 AGROS fibre 
 
VR-8 Punicalagins 40% Food supplements and Health food:  Cardiovascular health, antioxidant. Feed additives 
Gut health. Aflatoxin protection. Cosmetic: skincare, UV protection and anti-wrinkle VR-8 Punicalagin 70% 
VR-8 Ellagic acid 30% Food supplements and Health food:  Antiaging formulations. Feed additives Gut health 
and gut function. Antioxidant for aflatoxin protection.  
VR-8 Ursolic acid 15% Food supplements, Healthy food, Feed additive: To control oxidative stress and chronic 
inflammation. Patented synergistic effect combining with olive polyphenols  
VR-8 Non extractable 
polyphenols Feed additive: Gut health, reduction of gut permeability 
 
VR-9 Essential oil Food supplements: Aromatherapy Feed additives Antimicrobial, alternative to 
antibiotics; Cosmetic: perfumery.  
VR-9 Rosmarinic acid 6% Food supplements, Healthy food: digestive disorders, antispasmodic.  
VR-9, 
10  
Diterpenes 
10-20% Food supplements: antioxidant, antiaging formulations; Food: technological antioxidant 
E-392 Feed additives growth promoter; hepatoprotection; gut health; Cosmetic: 
antiaging formulas. VR-10 Carnosic acid 
40%  
VR-9, 
10 Ursolic acid 40% Food supplements, Healthy food, Feed additive: To control oxidative stress and chronic 
inflammation. Patented synergistic effect combining with olive polyphenols  
 
VR-11 Essential oil Food supplements:  Aromatherapy Feed additives Antimicrobial, alternative to 
antibiotics; Cosmetic: perfumery.  
VR-11 Verbascoside 25% Food supplements: Gut health, anti-inflammatory, reduces colon chronic inflammation 
Feed additives Gut function. Cosmetic: skin damage as anti-inflammatory. VR-11 Verbascoside 
50%  
VR-11 Triterpenic acids 15% Feed additive: To control oxidative stress and chronic inflammation 
VR-11 Polyphenols 15% Food supplements, Feed additives Sedative, help to sleep, stress reduction 
 
VR-12 Essential oil Food supplements: Aromatherapy, Cosmetic: perfumery.  
VR-12 Flavonoids 5% Food supplements: Gut function, dyspepsia, digestive comfort  
VR-12 Apigenins 8% Food supplements: Antispasmodic, anti-inflammatory. Cosmetic: inflammations, 
irritations and skin infections VR-12 Apigenins 16% 
VR-12 Polyphenol 20% Food supplement: flatulence and nausea Cosmetic: dermatitis. 
 
IV.- End users and Product Applications: (WP4) 
End users will validate SUSTAINEXT’s new ingredients at TRL 8 using the following product development techniques: 
i) food supplement formulations (NUT) the plant-based extracts generated in the VRs will be characterized and the 
most appropriate candidates selected for developing food supplements focusing on the following health beneficial 
applications: cardiovascular, liver, antioxidants, sleep, and beauty. Novel galenic formulations will be developed using 
NutraResearch’s Innovative Platform. The performance of the developed formulations will be tested to establish the 

 
 
 Page 20 of 70 
ideal commercial presentation and industrialization path and bring commercially viable products to the market; ii) 
Food ingredients (STAR, AGROS): Enzymatic digestion processes and other food technologies will be applied to study 
the incorporation of PFF fibres in different food matrices. Food technologies will be applied to develop soluble 
infusion prototypes whose technical, sensorial, efficiency and tolerability characteristics will be eval uated. Equally, 
the plant-based extracts will be tested for antioxidant and antimicrobial activity to study their application in various 
food matrices (WP4); iii) Pets formulations  (ACEL, UNITO) will carry out bioactivity assays to study the anti -
inflammatory and antioxidant activities of the ingredients focused on improving intestinal health of dogs and cats 
and will perform the galenic developments to obtain the first prototypes at TRL 8; iv) Feed additives: based on 
previous bioactivity studies of the produced extracts conducted by the partners and scientific literature, formulations 
will be developed for different species of farm animals and will be studied in in vivo assays in poultry and ruminant 
farms; v) Cosmetics (MBL) will carry out nano -encapsulation and liposome formation studies to develop new 
cosmetic formulations, study their stability and antioxidant properties and conduct trials to increase the 
bioavailability of different lead-extracts. Finally, a cohort of in vitro biological assays will be carried out with the best 
formulations to initiate their commercialization to TRL 8; vi) Bio-based fertilizers (BIOM): specific formulations will be 
developed from the exhausted feedstocks and other components adapted to the individual cultivation needs of the 
MAP crops in the project, including the biomass ash from the biomass boiler.   
 
1.2.2. Feedstock 
SUSTAINEXT will use a selection of feedstocks widely spread in Europe, such as olive and artichoke (all Mediterranean 
coast), pomegranate side -streams (Mediterranean coast, Poland, Germany), rosemary (Mediterranean coast), 
camomile (southwest Europe, Germa ny), lemon verbena (original from South America but widely distributed in 
Europe since the 17th cent). 
All feedstocks to be used in SUSTAINEXT are under the scope of the feedstocks foreseen in SRIA: Agro-industrial side 
streams: olive oil industry side streams (leaves, OMWW, olive fruit skins); artichoke industry side streams (leaves and 
bracts), cardoon aerial part from the cheese manufacturing industry and pomegranate industry side streams (peel) 
are all included in ANNEX V of SRIA Agri-food feedstocks: “Side streams and residual streams (or residues) from 
agriculture and horticulture” and  “bio-waste and side streams from the food and feed production/processing” 
Medicinal plants: lemon verbena, rosemary and camomile are not food crops and are included in included in ANNEX 
V of SRIA Agri-food feedstocks: “Perennial grasses, fibre crops or other industrial crops” 
Respects the “cascading use” and “food first” principles. DYANA represent the highest level of biorefining (smart and 
dynamic) and cascading approach is in the DNA of the system that maximizes the resource -use efficiency by 
prioritising the processing steps by value creation (economic, environmental and social). 
Considering the food first princ iple, agro-industrial side streams (olive, artichoke, pomegranate, and cardoon) are 
indeed underexploited industry by -products that may even cause a negative environmental impact if not well 
managed. SUSTAINEXT does not represent, then, any competence with  food applications. Medicinal plants used in 
the project are not food crops (not intended to feed the population). Moreover, most of healthy ingredients to be 
produced in SUSTAINEXT are to be used as functional healthy ingredients and additives in the food and feed industry, 
contributing to the overall quality and sustainability of these products. 
Environmental sustainability requirements: All feedstocks to be used in the project will be produced according to 
current regulation, respecting local ecological limits and promoting biodiversity protection. Cultivated plants 
(rosemary, camomile, and lemon verbena) will be cultivated in Extremadura, fostering short supply chain. The side 
streams biomass employed (olive, pomegranate, artichoke and cardoon) will also come from Extremadura and south 
of Spain, where these processing industries are located, also developing short supply chains. 
Climate change mitigation: Crops will be located in current tobacco cultivation fields (TABEX), solar plant fields (ENEL) 
and agriculture fields (DOP), with no impact on lands with high carbon stock. The project will have a positive ILUC, 
considering that fields currently used to produce energy with solar panels will be used and optimized to produce 
medicinal plants either, maximizing land use. 
Biodiversity protection: Considering the species and farming places where feedstock will be produced, SUSTAINEXT 
feedstock will not have any impact on biodiversity: 
- High-risk Plant Production Products (PPPs): None of project feedstocks are listed in the “list of high-risk plants, 
plant products and other objects, within the meaning of Article 42(1) of Regulation (EU) 2016/2031” 
- Harvesting impacting on biodiversity in forests: No forest will be used as farming places 
- SUSTAINEXT will not introduce any invasive species according to Regulation (EU) 1143/2014 on invasive alien 
species 
- SUSTAINEXT will not impact land within the red Natura 2000, as  feedstocks will not be produced in any land 
included in Natura 2000. 
 
 
 Page 21 of 70 
Zero pollution ambition:  i) SUSTAINEXT will ensure that no open burning of residues is done; ii) Pesticides and 
fertilisers used in plant cultivations will be within the limits set by th e organic farming framework; iii) SUSTAINEXT 
will not produce any manure. 
Water resources protection:  Water is a key issue in the project. As it is well explained in section 1.2. 4.4, several 
actions will be deployed to save water, also ensuring that no surface or groundwater resources are depleted beyond 
replenishment capacities. 
 
1.2.3. ’Do no significant harm’ principle 
The methodology presented in the project SUSTAINEXT is designed to put in operation a first-of-its-kind biorefinery 
with the capacity to process many different types of feedstocks for obtaining high added value products in a 
sustainable and circular manner and a zero-waste and zero-pollution ambition. For this reason, SUSTAINEXT will not 
harm neither of the six environmental objectives of the EU Taxonomy Regulation.  
 
i.Climate change mitigation: SUSTAINEXT new Flagship will have a NetZero ambition (scope 1 & 2) and will 
dramatically reduce the CO2 footprint and GHG emissions (section 1.2.4.1 and 1.2.4.4).  Besides the crops cultivated 
in the project will fix CO2 and new developed bio-based fertilizers will restore carbon to soil. 
 
ii.Climate change adaptation: SUSTAINEXT will put every effort in maximizing the energy and water flows recirculation 
(Section 1.2. 4.1 and 1.2. 4.4). Moreover, in the production plant with the aim to maximally increase the 
sustainability of the plant. Particular emphasis has been dedicated to wat er, considering that Spain foresees a 
critical water situation derived from climate change. 
 
iii.Sustainable use and protection of water and marine resources: SUSTAINEXT will make a responsible use of water. 
SUSTAINEXT flagship is not a highly demanded water industry, and it will reuse 80 % of the water. Besides, it will 
eliminate water residues from the project (section 1.2.4.4). Crops in the project are not highly water demanding. 
 
iv.Transition to a circular economy  SUSTAINEXT has a commitment with the Z ERO WASTE ambition. It will use 
sustainably sourced feedstock including agro -industrial side -streams. Project and flagship have been defined 
following a “circular by-design” concept (section 1.2.4.2).  
 
v.Pollution prevention and control  SUSTAINEXT has a com mitment with the ZERO POLLUTION ambition. As 
extensively explained in section 1.2. 4.3 The main emission points in the new flagship have been identified and 
mitigation measures defined to reduce pollutant emissions (gas, particles, noise, contaminants). Feedstocks in the 
project will follow the organic farming framework. 
 
vi.Protection and restoration of biodiversity and ecosystems  SUSTAINEXT flagship has been designed to respect the 
surrounding area (noise levels, pollution, emissions, land and ecosystems competition).  Feedstocks will respect the 
biodiversity protection according considering High-risk Plant Production Products, Harvesting, invasive species, and 
red Natura 2000 (section 1.2.2). Moreover, SUSTAINEXT will drive the transition from a mono cultivation of tobacco 
plant to a multi crop with new MAPS, increasing biodiversity. Additional information is given in section 1.2.1.Ia. 
 
1.2.4. Environmental critical issues 
SUSTAINEXT’s goal and orientation towards a safe and sustainable model factory can be supported by having recently 
obtained the certification ISO 14001 in its current production facility, a certificate verifying the compliance to the set 
criteria of having implemented an effective environmental management system. 
SUSTAINEXT has performed an ex-ante analysis to identify and prioritise the critical environmental issues, propose 
mitigation measures and quantify its impact. 
 
1.-CLIMATE CHANGE: Ensuring resource/energy efficiency and reducing CO2 emissions. 
Resource and energy efficiency: The most energy consuming project steps are extraction, concentration, and spray-
drying. Several actions will be implemented to reduce energy consumption, increase yield, and maximize resource 
efficiency: i) all the extraction and concentration systems wil l be provided with systems for thermic recuperation 
with inlet and outlet flows; ii) a set of sensors will be validated and implemented in the extraction, concentration and 
spray-drying equipment to real time monitor its performance and optimize operation times; iii) a new 
desolventisation unit will be installed in the extractor with double aim (enhance ethanol recovery and reduce 
residence time and water steam consumption (180 min to 45 min); iv) alternative vacuum dryers systems will be 
introduced to improve the drying efficiency and reduce the energy costs in certain processes; v) The efficiency of the 
spray dryer will be increased by recirculating hot outlet air to heat the inlet. 
Green energy production. Towards NetZero: i) new photovoltaic panels will be positioned in the exterior of all new 
buildings to be installed to achieve an energy production capacity of 1.5 M kVh in the DYANA biorefinery; ii) biomass 
boilers will be installed and coupled with a system for cogeneration of electrical energy using a  vapour expansion 
system. In addition, a system for thermic recuperation of combustion gases will be included in the biomass boilers 
 
 
 Page 22 of 70 
to reduce the exit temperature from 240ºC to approximately 40ºC. This heat source will be recirculated to heat the 
water entering the boiler. SUSTAINEXT AIMS TO ACHIVE A NETZERO CARBON EMISSIONS 
 
 
 
2.- WASTE: Ensuring the DYANA biorefinery is zero-waste 
Zero waste: With the use of the new Smart Dynamic Multi Valorisation -Route Biorefinery model, utilisation of the 
feedstock will be 100%. A part of the side streams will be employed for the generation of bio -based fertilizers and 
PFF, and the rest will be directed to the biomass b oiler for energy cogeneration. For the rest of the generated solid 
waste (paper, carton, plastics, etc.) the present-day’s company policy of 100% recycling will be maintained. 
Residual ash from biomass chamber will be used in the formulation of biobased fertilizers. 
Toxic and hazardous chemicals will not be used in the production process, the only chemical solvent used will be 
ethanol and it will be highly recirculated for its maximal exploitation by rectification (distillation) towers that permit 
re-obtaining ethanol 96%.  
A minimum quantity of hazardous wastes will be produced in the quality control and R&D lab. These wastes represent 
less than 1 % of flagship wastes and will be managed by an authorized waste manager. 
Circular by design, prevention, and ci rcularity: This will be achieved by applying the circular economy principles of: 
R2 Rethink, R3 Reduce and R9 Recycle: application of bio -based products in different markets (food supplements, 
feed additives for animal farmers, pets, cosmetic, food ingredi ents, food additives, biostimulants and biobased 
fertilizers as well as performance chemicals, building blocks chemicals for performance chemicals).  
SUSTAINEXT will apply circularly designed processes that allow the consumption of fewer natural resources and 
materials and reprocessing bio-waste and by-products from the olive oil, artichoke and pomegranate food industries 
to produce high-added value products. Activities contributing to circular value recovery in SUSTAINEXT will include: 
i) utilizing OMWW to replace chemical synthesis, the process currently used for producing hydroxytyrosol of high 
purity; ii) utilising olive leaves, by-products of the olive oil industry to give value to this underexploited biomass; iii) 
utilising pomegranate peel residues in stead of whole fruit, thus not competing with the food industry; iv) utilising 
three artichoke by-products, wastes of 2 different sectors of the food industry, instead of cultivated artichoke.   
 
3.- POLLUTION: Zero pollution ambition 
Air: two main air pollutants have been identified: volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and particles.  Emissions of 
other vapours, odours or hot water are not foreseen in the project. Moreover, dangerous substances will not be 
used, nor will be used toxic chemicals or other o rganic solvents except for ethanol. However, different mitigation 
measures will be implemented following the zero-pollution ambition: 
- VOCs are produced in i) gas washer of the ethanol rectification column unit and ii) the biomass boiler. Mitigation 
measures: i) The functional efficiency of the system will be improved with two actions: replacing the water -
cooling system with a water-glycol system that operates at much lower temperatures; and installing an active 
carbon filter.  
- Particle emission in i) spry -dryer, ii) biomass boiler and iii) clean rooms. Mitigation measures: i) new vacuum 
drying technologies which do not emit particles and use a gas scrubber (or washer) that maximally reduces the 
emission of particles of the spray -dryer; ii) biomass combustion boiler will incorporate all the available 
technological systems, including electrostatic and ceramic catalytic filters, that enable simultaneous removal of 
particulates, nitrogen oxides and sulphur oxides; iii) new air filtration systems will be installed in the clean rooms 
that recirculate the employed air and ensure zero particles emission in the environment (HEPA filters) 
Soil pollution: Soil contamination risk in the factory is not likely, as all operational surface of the factory is 
impermeabilized with asphalt and concrete decks. Solvent tanks are buried in the ground, double -walled and 
equipped with vacuum-based leakage detection systems. 
Noise: main noise pollution point in the factory are the cooling towers fans. Insulating panels have already been 
installed. A similar type of preventive action might be put in place in spray -drying extraction ventilators to ensure 
zero-noise 
 
4.- WATER EFFICIENCY MANAGEMENT 
Current factory recirculates 20 % of water used. There are  currently 4 processes in the factory where water is 
involved: i) hydroxytyrosol purification process 960 m3 water for each MT of HT-20 produced. Current system allows 
100% recirculation; ii) cooling towers, with a maximum water consumption capacity of 60 m3/day; iii) cleaning water; 
iv) residual water from distillation units.  Residual water is currently managed in factory WWTS (wastewater 
treatment station), that releases purified residual waters to the municipal treatment plant.  
Two mitigation measures have been defined to increase recirculation water to 80 %. i) a new step in VR-4 will allow 
to maximize water recovery fr om OMWW and introduce in the system a positive water supply of 3.100 m 3 
 
 
 Page 23 of 70 
(considering an annual production of 25 MT of HT20); ii) a reverse osmosis unit will be installed after the WWTS, this 
high-quality purified water will be recirculated and employed as source of water for the cooling towers. 
Following these three actions, water recirculation higher than 80% will be achieved in SUSTAINEXT. And water waste 
will be reduced < 1 %. 
5.- SAFE AND SUSTAINABLE BY DESIGN 
SUSTAINEXT will implement the Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability (CSS) criteria and focus on a Safe and 
Sustainable by Design approach for chemicals to support a zero -pollution economy and a toxic -free environment. 
Safety will be assured by restricting all the chemicals on the authoritative lists of hazardous chemicals (REACH Annex 
XVII) in the workflows, incoming feedstock and end-products.  
Renewable, bio -based raw materials will be used for the generation of non -toxic, non-hazardous and bio -based 
products in circular workflows designed to minimize the generated waste. 
Minimal environmental footprint of the chemicals will be ensured by only using water and ethanol in the production 
processes, aiming at maximal solvent recirculation and avoiding the disposal of lar ge volumes of solvents in the 
environment.  
Additionally, material efficiency will be strategized by minimizing the generated waste and completely utilizing the 
inlet feedstock, while co -generating energy in the process. Applying these approaches, the Gree n Chemistry 
principles for efficient utilization of raw materials and elimination of waste will be assured.  
 
1.2.5. Environmental sustainability performance 
Environmental sustainability performance Vs Current state of the art . In this section the aim is to estimate the CO2 
footprint and fossil energy reduction potential of proposed improvements Vs current processing at Natac’s factory 
as benchmark. This facility was built in 2020 and has been designed following the highest standards of the botanical 
ingredients sector. It can be considered one of the “best performing” botanical ingredient plants in Europe.  
 
Climate neutrality: A complete LCA has already been performed with current processes performed in Natac’s state-
of-the-art factory. The assessment has been conducted with real data from the factory for a production of olive leaf 
extract standardized in oleuropein 13. Figure 1.9 shows the energy and mass flowchart and the calculated carbon 
footprint. 
 
Figure 1.9 Carbon footprint, energy and mass flowchart in the production of OPA20 in Natac's current production plant 
 
Applying the IPCC GWP20 method on these process calculations, the Global Warming Potential in 20 years measures 
of CO2 have been distributed in fossil, biogenic, land transformation and CO2 uptake (Fig 1.10). 
 
Figure 1.10 Distribution of fossil, biogenic, land transformation and CO2 uptake.  
Becoming Net Zero 
1.- Resource efficiency improvement: 
 
13 OELAF4VALUE project data. 

 
 
 Page 24 of 70 
SUSTAINEXT will definitely improve the overall resource efficiency in three areas: 
a) Improvement of feedstock quality (FSI) by the application of selected pre-treatments. 
As defined in the methodology section, several feedstock pre-treatments have been developed and will be scaled at 
TRL 8 during SUSTAINEXT. Improvements in target bioactive compounds concentration will have a direct impact in 
process yield and in CO 2 product footprint. Table 1.2 shows how FSI modulation affects CO 2 product footprint for 
selected feedstocks with similar proces ses than olive leaf extract. As it can be seen, FSI improvement reduces CO 2 
product footprint between 20 - 70 %. Data shows the product yield per 1 MT of processed feedstock. 
  
Table 1.2 CO2 product footprint variation in relation to the FSI of the biomass 
Feedstock Status  FSI Yield (kg prod)  kg CO2/kg prod % Reduction 
Olive 
leaves 
Current 0,4 270 0,36 45% SUSTAINEXT 0,7 495 0,20 
Olive skin Current 0,5 198 0,50 21% SUSTAINEXT 0,7 252 0,39 
Artichoke Current 0,3 225 0,44 70% SUSTAINEXT 0,7 750 0,13 
 
b) Multi-valorisation routes: more from less. 
New multi-valorisation route approach will dramatically increase the products obtained out of each feedstock (from 
11 to 46 plant-based healthy extracts and functional ingredients). Energy consumption will slightly increase derived 
from additional steps in  fractionation/purification and, specially, in drying. However, extraction and concentration 
consumed energy will remain stable. Our current production forecast foresees that as an average, DYANA will double 
the yield (see section 2.1.2). Together with add itional purification steps, the ex -ante calculation estimates a total 
increase of 42 % electricity and 34 % heat in cascade biorefining. In this context we will deliver doble tons of products 
with an increase in 35-40 % energy, improving resource efficiency in 27-29 % per kg of final product.  
c) Improving process efficiency.  
As previously detailed, several improvements have been designed to reduce energy consumption and cost in key 
process steps: extraction, concentration and drying. A wide palette of new measures will be implemented to reduce 
energy consumption and improve resource efficiency: 
1. Fixed extraction time to ensure full extraction of bioactive compounds are used today. A new real time sensors 
(Task 2.3) able to detect when extraction solvent is saturated. 
2. New desolventisation system able to reduce the time of alcohol recovery in the extractor. 
These two measures will reduce an average of 20 % residence time in this step (common to all processes), 
from 9h to 7 h. 
3.  A sensor will be developed and installed in concentrator (Task 2.3.2) allowing to detect when alcohol has been 
totally removed, reducing 10 % in concentration time. 
4. Concentration: Systems for thermic recuperation with inlet and outlet flows will allow to save 5 % of the energy 
used during the concentration step. 
5. A moisture detection sensor will be installed in the spray dryer chamber allowing to determine in real -time 
the water content of products, allowing to optimise equipment performance. 
6. New vacuum drying system will be installed. This equipment is less energy consuming than spray drying and 
can be used in distinct applications.  
7. The terpenes isolation plant will incorporate extractors with a capacity of 10,000 L, compared to the 3,000 L 
extractors now in place. Larger extractors reduce overall consumption and operation times per Kg extracted 
product. Also, they improve energy efficiency in large production batches that have a lower extraction yield. 
d) Producing green energy 
Photovoltaic solar panels: 500.000 kWh of electricity has been installed in the factory already, this will be increased 
to 1 million of kWh of total production (616 additional panels with 550 Wp, yielding ≈ 500,000 kWh).  
Biomass boilers: As said, a brand-new last generation biomass boiler will be installed in the plant. The boiler will be 
fed with the last remaining feedstock and respecting the cascade principle. SUSTAINEXT will prioritize the following: 
high added value bioactive healthy products > food/feed ingredients > soil nutrients > energy. From the final residual 
exhausted biomass after the complete valorisation, we have estimated that an average of 40 % (60 % will go to 
produce fibre and bi o-based fertilizers) will feed the boiler to produce energy. Considering the production 
established in the BP, 10,000 ton of processed feedstock will yield approximately 3,000 ton of exhausted biomass to 
energy production. This will produce 900,000 m3 of natural gas equivalent (300 m3 gas/ton). 
 
 
 Page 25 of 70 
Additionally, during the olive skin pre-treatment process, 10 kg olive pits are obtained as a side-stream per kg of skin. 
It is estimated that 1.500 ton of olive skin will be used for the production of maslinic acid enriched extracts. This will 
yield a total 12.000 ton of olive pits, yielding a total of 6 M m3 of natural gas equivalent (olive pit = 402 m3 gas/ton). 
Biomass boiler will also generate electricity by cogeneration, assuring the necessary electricity to cov er future 
demands.  
The achieved resource efficiency derived from the measures explained before and the calculated green energy 
production capacity will fully cover internal energy requirements and will allow to become NET-ZERO.  In other words, 
all the energy used in the flagship will be green energy internally produced. 
 
Zero pollution 
According to initial assessment, five critical emission points have been identified in the new flagship. Table 1.3 
summarized the estimated emissions, proposed mitigation measures and result after mitigation. 
 
Table 1.3 Estimated emissions in the current plant, proposed mitigation measures and results after mitigation 
Emission point Emission Current 
limits Mitigation measure Result 
Rectification tower VOCs 50 mg/Nm3 
- New water-glycol 
mixtures system  
- Active carbon filter 
< 10 mg/Nm3 
Biomass boiler 
NOx, S02 650 mg/Nm3 Last generation, 
electrostatic and 
catalytic ceramic filters 
<50 mg/Nm3 
Particles  60 mg/Nm3 <2 mg/Nm3 
Spray Dryer Particles (not hazard) 60 mg/Nm3 New gas scrubber or 
washer 
<10 mg/Nm3 
VOCs 50 mg/Nm3 <4 mg/Nm3 
Clean rooms Particles (not 
hazardous) 60 mg/Nm3 - HEPA filters  <2 mg/Nm3 
Refrigeration units Noise 70 dB - Acoustic panels < 35 dB 
 
Zero waste: Main waste sources have been identified and measures to avoid waste have been proposed: DYANA will 
allow to valorise each feedstocks using a cascade principle and prioritizing value (innovative healthy products>food 
and feed ingredients > biobased f ertilizers > energy). With this cascade use, 100 % of employed feedstocks will be 
used. SUSTAINEXT will only employ water and ethanol in the process. Both solvents will be recirculated. Efficient 
ethanol recovery through rectification will be achieved reaching > 99,5 % of recovery (the remaining 0,5 % is lost as 
traces in the exhausted biomass). Table 1.4 summarises waste generation and full use. 
 
Table 1.4 Waste generation and proposed use to achieve zero-waste 
Generated waste Use Result 
Exhausted biomass after 
extraction 
 
≈20 % new fibre  
≈40 % biobased fertilizer 
≈40 % energy production 
- New value ingredient for food/feed 
- New biobased fertilizers to restore carbon 
back to soil 
- Green energy production 
Non-hazardous ash produced 
in biomass boiler 
- Ingredient to formulate new biobased 
fertilizers 
- New biobased fertilizers to restore carbon 
back to soil 
Lab hazardous waste from 
R&D and quality control lab. 
- Represent < than 1% and will be 
managed by authorized waste managers -  Does not represent an environmental issue 
Paper, carboard, plastics, etc. - Partners are compromised with 100 % 
recycling policy - Does not represent an environmental issue 
 
1.2.6. Carbon removal 
SUSTAINEXT will effectively contribute to carbon neutrality by providing nature -based solutions to climate change 
applying innovative and sustainable agricultural practices like agrivoltaic installations, crop rotation and repurposing 
abandoned land with low carbon stock. These restorative agricultural practices will support healthy soils and mitigate 
climate change by actively removing CO2 from the atmosphere and sequestering it in plant biomass. The rate of CO2 
sequestration depends on many factors, including the crop species, the conditions of growth and the quality of the 
soil, among others. Even though these factors can introduce differences, in general, the CO2 captured by plants tends 
to fluctuate between 45 and 50% of the plant’s dry weight. Therefore, having in mind that the biomass that will be 
cultivated for the necessities of SUSTAINEXT during the 5 years of project duration in the form of rosemary, lemon 
verbena, camomile and cardoon will result in 820 MT of dry biomass, SUSTAINEXT’s plants will sequester 300,628 Kg 
 
 
 Page 26 of 70 
of CO2 per year, or 1,503,142 Kg of CO2 in total, according to a preliminary assessment14. Besides, by creating more 
farmland, the input of organic matter to the soil carbon will be increased resulting in the return of soil organic carbon 
and ca rbon sequestration. Additionally, exploiting the olive leaf biomass by -product that is nowadays mainly 
eliminated by controlled burning in the field for production of high-added value bio-based products will reduce the 
greenhouse gas and particulates emiss ions. On the other hand, switching from the usage of natural gas to using a 
biomass boiler for energy supply will substantially reduce fossil fuel consumption in the plant by 100%. In SUSTAINEXT 
a detailed study including all activities related to, on one side cultivation, such as fertilization treatment, agricultural 
practices, soil quality, etc., and on the other side, the industrial processing operations will be conducted by BIOM 
calculate the net CO2 balance of the project.  
 
1.2.7. Multi-actor approach 
Multi-actor approach has been and will be carried out in SUSTAINEXT to ensure that the flagship and the project is 
completely aligned with the stakeholders and with the environment in which it operates, at every level: social, 
environmental and governance (ESG). To achieve this goal, it has been designed and followed a combination of LEAN 
and materiality assessment methodologies. 
- LEAN because the process starts from the end of value chain perspective, in our case our stakeholders 
(feedstock producers, end users, policy makers, investors, consumer, society, etc.)  and our main goal is to 
achieve maximum satisfaction form their side. Moreover, during the process we carry out an iterative approach 
to validate our strategy, optimize, and update, if needed, any of our goals and strategy. Working hand to hand 
with all key actors. 
- Materiality assessment  to prioritize the key aspects through a material matrix. A materiality analysis is an 
internationally used tool to identify the economic, environmental, and  social impact of companies and their 
value chains. This is critical to helping them design their strategy, make decisions, and define their 
communication both internally and externally. 
Multi-actor approach application will follow these stages: 
1. Context analysis: an analysis has been conducted of SUSTAINEXT’s business model, the supply chain, and the 
potential impact of our actions on the ecosystem. Main stakeholders and key aspects have been identified.  
2. Stakeholder open dialogue, and engagement. Following the first step, an intense and open dialogue was held 
with SUSTAINEXTs’ stakeholders (interviews, discussions, surveys). This open communication allowed to gain 
first-hand knowledge about what is priority for them. 
3. In-depth analysis of all the information gathered. During this stage the key aspects have been identified and 
prioritised. By cross-referencing all the results obtained in the stakeholder dialogue phase, we obtained the 
Materiality Matrix (Fig 1.11), in which we can observe which of the selected issues are truly priorities. These 
issues are known as material aspects and help us to define our strategic goals, KPIs and strategy. 
4. Definition of goals . When the materiality aspects are identified, target goals, KPIs and a strategy towards 
implementation will be defined. 
5. Implementation of the strategy.  At last, the strategy is implemented, communicated  and discussed and 
reviewed with the stakeholders in order to conduct a systematic and iterative review and update its content 
and goals, where necessary. 
 
Figure 1.11 Materiality Matrix of SUSTAINEXT 
 
14 Camacho Barboza et al. (2014). ENERGY CONSUMPTION AND CO2 BALANCE IN HORTICULTURE: A CASE STUDY IN THE VENETO REGION, ITALY. Acta Hortic. 
1018, 495-502 

 
 
 Page 27 of 70 
From this analysis, the main priorities from stakeholders have been raised (Table 1.5). 
 
Table 1.5 Main priorities for stakeholders resulting from an in-depth analysis of the Open Dialogue  
1.- Governance 
i) Social and technological innovation ; ii) Importance of sustainability along the supply chain ; iii) Increase social 
engagement towards bioeconomy. 
2.- Climate action: 
i) Generate a positive impact in the region: environment, landscape, emissions (waste, air, water), green energy, 
waste management and zero residue; ii) Responsible production and consumption of resources. 
3.- Social 
i) Combat demographic challenge. Creation of decent, steady, quality employment that is accessible to all under 
equal conditions, foster the use of marginal and underused fields, promoting local economy  and sustainable 
agriculture; ii) Engagement and strategic alliances with the local community 
 
Steps 1 to 3 have already been conducted last year and during project preparation. Results are shown in Table 1.5. 
Step 4 and 5  will be carried out during the project and as part of Task 6.3. This task will be dedicated to validating 
each project step with target key stakeholders within and outside the consortium (LoIs submitted). In order to ensure 
a good engagement of the key stakeholders, project partners cover the whole value chain from the field to the table 
(farmers, technology providers, manufacturers, environme ntal assessment experts, end users). Additional key 
stakeholders just as civil and sectorial associations, policy makers, and genera society, will be part of the planned 
work and have already shown their willing to participate. 
All actors in the value chain have been already engaged:  
Actors inside SUSTAINEXT:  
• Farmers and feedstock producers, feedstock suppliers: TABEX, AGROS, DOP, INNO, INP 
• Technology suppliers and developers NATAC, ARRAM, IRIS, ENEL, CTAEX, ECO, NATAC, UNITO 
• Brand owners, clients and end users MIAVIT, ACEL, NUTRA, MIBELLE, UNITO, BIOM 
• Associations and platforms: FUNDECYT, BIOPLAT 
Actors committed to participate during the project (LoIs submitted):  
• Investors and advisors: Inveready Seed Capital, Avante 
• Consumer associations and civil society: ACUIPLUS, GENERAL FOLLOWERS 
• Local communities: MANCOMUNIDAD VALLE DEL AMBROZ, Grupo de Acción local DIVA 
• Goverment representatives: Extremadura Region Representatives, Townhall of Hervas 
Additional link with other initiatives (see section 1.1.4) will also take part of this task, with special emphasis on similar 
initiatives such as projects from EIP -AGRI Operational Groups in which the coordinator is already included 
(GLOBALPAM and GOCYNARA). 
This methodology will guarantee, on the one hand, that priorities of all involved parts are well covered, and, on the 
other hand, will generate a synergistic approach enabling to find the best solution for each challenge faced during 
the project execution through a co -creation process, while fostering the  acceptance and uptake of new ideas, 
approaches and solutions developed in the project towards a bio-based sustainable transition. 
1.2.8. research and innovation activities  
The partners of SUSTAINEXT have a wide experience participating in investigation projects whose results and know-
how can make a great contribution to SUSTAINEXT. The most significant ones, also mentioned in section 1.1.5, are: 
MAGNIFICENT (BBI-JU H2020 GA 745754), PROENRICH (BBI-JU H2020 GA 792050), NEWCOTIANA (H2020, GA: 
760331) (NATAC), biorefinery practices and strategies for the extraction and purification in cascade of different active 
compounds whose outcomes are highly applicable in SUSTAINEXT. OLIVENET (H2020 GA 734899) will contribute to 
SUSTAINEXT mainly for analytical methods for characterisation of olive feedstocks as well as, extraction and 
purification strategies. AQUOLIVE (H2020 GA 830202) (NATAC) is a good precedent to support SUSTAINEXT on 
processes to develop specif ic ingredients for a market sector. URBIOFIN (BBI-JU H2020, GA 745785) with the 
participation of IRIS and BIOM will provide the knowledge base in the development of integrated innovative 
biorefineries. COOP4PAM ((EP INTERREG V A Espanha Portugal (POCTEP).1665) (CTAEX) will offer experience on MAP 
cultivation techniques. IRODDI (BBI JU H2020 887407), CARBIOW (H2020 GA 953192) and HyFuelUp (BIOPALT) will 
supply SUSTAINEXT the expertise in biomass industry engagement and fostering public awareness of the acceptance 
of bio -based solutions. UP2CIRC (H2020; GA 101091367) will bring the experience acquired by FUNCYT for the 
revitalization of opportunities for innovation in the bio-based industry 
 
 
 
 
 
 Page 28 of 70 
1.2.9. Inter disciplines expertise and methods 
The wide scope of the project requires the engagement of actors from across the whole bio -based value chain and 
interdisciplinarity is at the core of SUSTAINEXT. In this ambitious industrial project we involve partners and 
collaborators that belong to different relevant areas (researchers and technicians with expertise in high-added value 
plant extracts, waste management, bio -based industries, agronomy, engineering, digitalisation and real time 
monitorization, innovation, exploitation, Protected Designation  of Origin agri -food products branding, and 
communication) to guarantee that the outcome of the  project is applicable at all levels and circumvents the potential 
barriers that may challenge the successful implementation of the resulting innovative botanical ingredients circular 
industrial model.  
SUSTAINEXT is formed by 21 partners who cover diverse knowledge areas that complement each other to create a 
well equilibrated consortium:  i) In the supply-chain of sustainably-sourced feedstocks we can rely on: INNO for olive, 
AGROS for pomegranate and artichoke, DOP for cardoon, TABEX for crops in underused tobacco fields, ENEL for 
agrivoltaic crops, INP for camomile and CTAEX as an agro -industrial RTO; ii) For the design and construction of the 
biorefinery, NATAC and ARRAM have recently finished the construction of the current production plant in Hervás. 
ARRAM is an expert in construction engineering and IRIS an expert in digitalization and sensor design. ECO will be in 
charge of performing LCA studies; iii) As end-users, we can count on 6 partners, each one a leader in the technological 
sector in which they operate: NUT is a leading company in developing galenic formulations for food supplements, 
STAR is an association expert in foods development, ACEL an expert in formulations for pets, MIAVIT in additives for 
feed, MIBELLE is an LE expert in ingredients for cosmetics and BIOM in the development of fertilizer formulations. 
iv) Finally, FUNDECYT will be in charge of implementing the multi-actor approach at the regional level of Extremadura 
and BIOPLAT at the level of Spain and the rest of the countries. 
In order to assure we succeed in our model, our Consortium covers a wide and well -balanced know -how and 
organization types, including 8 partners for sustainable feedstock supply chain, 4 partners for biorefinery design and 
construction; 7 partners as end-users, and 2 partners for D&C and multi-actor approach.  
In total 1 University (UNI), 1 Technology Centre (RTO), 1 Tobacco Cooperative, 1 Protected Designation of Origin, 1 
biomass platform, 1 foundation, 9 Small and Medium Enterprises (SME) and 5 Large Com panies (LC). Thus, our 
consortium brings together the necessary expertise for reaching the topic’s purposes, since it covers leading 
industrial companies, forefront entities with high expertise in the optimization of innovations, validations and 
industrial processes, entities specialist in D&C and stakeholders’ engagement in the Farm to Fork scenario. 
 
1.2.10. Integration of social sciences  
Social sciences will be integrated in the project as the base for multi -actor engagement and co-development of the 
exploitation pathways, considering the global market trends and political priorities of in the EU set by the Green Deal 
and EUs bioeconomy strategy.  
Territorial dialogue is a social innovation approach that will be implemented in in WP 6 as part of multi -actor 
approach. Territorial dialogue is a form of dialogue that i) Aims at the co -creation of propositions in relation to a 
decision-making process. ii) Integrates all concerned parties. iii) Promotes listening and mutual understanding of 
each other’s needs. iv) Facilitates the dialogue of knowledge and puts the experts at the service of the dialogue. v) 
Requires the prior definition of a specific framework and process. vi) Follows a simple, progressive, and flexible 
conduct where the process predominates the facilit ation tools. vii) Is moderated by a person capable of showing 
empathy and adopting a neutral position.  
This innovative approach allows to formalise a consensus-building approach with a concrete output, in this case, the 
integrated circular bio-based business models, which are the key to bring the regions of Extremadura to the forefront 
of European bioeconomy. 
 
1.2.11. Gender dimension 
SUSTAINEXT is aligned to EU values, including equality between women and men. The consortium is committed to 
giving visibility to the gender dimension for the social relevance and quality of research and innovation activities. In 
addition to gender, it is proposed that SUSTAINEXT will also include equality, diversity, and inclusion aspects, having 
a non-discrimination policy against sex, race, religion or origin. 
The project will follow the gender policy of the EU and Public Engagement and Responsible Research and Innovation 
inclusive approach and take all measures to promote equal opportunities between all population gr oups. We will 
follow the guide published by the European Commission “Gendered Innovations 2: How inclusive analysis contributes 
to research and innovation”15. 
 
15 https://ec.europa.eu/info/publications/gendered-innovations-2-how-inclusive-analysis-contributes-research-and-innovation_en) and exploring the sex and 
gender methods for research (www.genderedinnovations.stanford.edu/index 
 
 
 Page 29 of 70 
The gender dimension will be addressed transversally in all stages of the project boosting gender  balance, non-
discrimination policy and equal opportunities, including social perception. The Project Coordinator will ensure a good 
gender balance throughout the project duration. Total and partners personnel dedication by gender to SUSTAINEXT 
will be tra cked during the project, ensuring there are no sex differences or gender assumptions, including at 
supervisory and managerial level. 
To assess the gender dimensions pertinent to SUSTAINEXT outputs/technologies and social impact, general and 
specific methods will be used to assess gender and intersectional analysis. These methods will include the analysis 
of sex and intersectionality in the biobased sector, critical examination of gender roles, norms and relations, and 
transformation of underlying social str uctures and policies that support gender inequality. Specifically for research 
and innovation, the gender dimension will include participatory research and co-creation to investigate the needs of 
different user groups, and correcting sex bias in research. Among the measures we will propose: 
- in technical activities – balanced participation of the partners´ researchers/ technicians of different genders 
will be encouraged – this will be overseen by the Project Coordinator, 
- in multi-actor approach - balanced representation of different genders in the multi -actor group sessions will 
be sought during participant recruitment, 
- in D&C activities - gender neutrality in the messages and channels chosen will be aimed at. 
The principles to ensure balanced gender dimension will be included in the multi-actor approach deliverables (WP6). 
SUSTAINEXT will have an important gender positive impact in rural areas. The contribution of women to the rural 
economy is widely underestimated and rural women have less access that men to productive resources. Addressing 
gender inequality and promoting decent work for rural women will be a priority, and consequently  translated into 
socioeconomic gains for all. It will provide more and better sex-disaggregated statistics on work in the rural economy.  
SUSTAINEXT coordinator (Natac) has a negative unadjusted gender pay gap (women in Natac have higher salaries 
than men), mainly derived from women working in highly qualified positions and decision -making bodies (57 % of 
steering committee composed by women). SUSTAINEXT will then contribute to reduce the gender pay gap and brake 
glass ceiling.  
 
1.2.12. Open science  
SUSTAINEXT consortium takes good, transparent, reproducible, and open science very seriously. It will follow the 
open-access policy of Horizon Europe, ensuring for open-access to publications by default, according to the principle 
“as open as possible, as closed as necessary”. 
All project outputs will be published following the FAIR (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable and Re -usable data) 
principles and open data sharing principles, to maximize the integrity and impact of the research. Data will be 
traceable and whenever possible available for subsequent use. 
Ensuring data transparency, all data and metadata will be deposited in public repositories in formats that anyone can 
find, access and reuse without restriction. If data cannot be open due to legal, privacy or other concerns (i.e personal 
or sensitive data) this would be clearly explained and clearly differentiate data protection from copyright issues. 
For publication in scientific journals, appropriate resources for Open Access and free publishing platform for scientific 
papers will be considered when submitting abstracts and manuscripts. The information will be available once the 
peer review has been published, although it could be expected restricted access to some personal data or specific 
industrial processes. For some datasets or company strategies, it will be contemplated total or partial publication of 
specific data maintaining the legal criteria and internal policy. In case of strictly confidential data, it would be 
accorded between the partners involved in the Grant Agreement.   
Aiming to ensure open science practices, knowledge and data sharing practices will be incorporated as early and 
widely as possible, to help diffuse and increase the overall added value of the most recent state-of-the-art research 
results. The partners will be informed of the modes of publication in Open Access journals, promoting the use of the 
modality Golden route (Directory of Open Access Journals). 
To ensure the findability of data/research outputs, the Digital Object Identifier (DOI) will be applied. This identifier 
will allow to a correct citation of SUSTAINEXT publications, guaranteeing that their impact can be measured, and the 
research and the data remain usable over time.  
In order to practically articulate this, the consort ium will follow the established Open Science practices to ensure 
good visibility and transparency of the results. Its compliance will be ensured by the Open Science Manager (OSM)– 
Natac. In the case of sensitive data, the OSM will be supported by the WP leaders to identify information that can be 
openly shared. In terms of sensitive information, the OSM and the relevant WP leader + involved partners will jointly 
identify the data which dissemination would not breach confidentiality. 
 
 
 
 
 Page 30 of 70 
Table 1.6 Preliminary summary of the open science project outputs 
Open source Description 
Open peer per 
review 
Up to 3 open accesses peer reviewed publications will be expected to be published during 
the project life and 2 open access publications 2 years after the project ends.  
Open-access 
publication 
We expect to publish up to 4 publications during the project life and 4 open access 
publications three years after the project is completed.  
Open research data All the public data generated in the project will be published on the European Open 
Science Cloud - EOSC www.eosc-portal.eu 
Citizens, civil society, 
and relevant 
stakeholders 
engagement 
All the information of the project will be ready for all partners through the 
communication channels described in WP6, which includes the adequate communication 
plan. Citizens will be engaged through communication, having the contact form on the 
website and the social media channels available.  
Data Management 
As part of WP6 a Data Management Plan (DMP) will be created and periodically updated. 
According to the information provided in the DMP, data (also in line with the FAIR 
principles) will be deposited in a trusted repository.  
 
1.2.13. Data management and management of other research outputs 
Data generated during the SUSTAINEXT will consist of laboratory notebooks, operation or process, industrial designs, 
layouts, analytical instruments' data, spreadsheets that include raw data obtained in each process or analysis, etc. It 
will equally generated data base contents, completed processes and workflows, prototype design like the developed 
sensors or informatics tools such as the new algorithm. All the generated data in the project will be assembled in a 
form of Standard Operational Procedures (SOP), spreadsheets or databases and rep orts containing the parameters 
of each conducted process. The data management will depend on the type of performed work.  
Nonetheless, templates and document models for data reporting will be provided. 
To ensure that the data generation, collection, management, and storage is in line with the FAIR principles, the Data 
Protection Manager from NATAC will be appointed. A Data Management Plan (DMP) will be elaborated following the 
Horizon Europe DMP template, submitted in M6 and periodically updated. The DMP will collect the data 
management practices, among others: 
- Findability of data / results – Open access data will be deposited in a trusted repository (e.g., ORE) – managed 
by the Open Science Manager. For ensured findability, it will be assigned a globally unique and persistent 
identifier. Public results will be uploaded to the project website. 
- Accessibility of data/results – Data will be as open as possible (exceptions for confidential data subjected to IP 
rights). All the research data will have long-term validity and will be well documented so other researchers can 
get access and use them after 5 years. 
- Interoperability of data/ results – All the data will be of coherent file formats, unified vocabularies, references 
etc., following the guidelines of the targeted trusted repositories. Furthermore, data storage will be organised 
to ensure that it is done in a consistent manner across WPs and partners. 
- Re-usability of data / results - The data/ results will be published under a Creative Commons license, which  
permits unrestricted use, distribution and reproduction provided the original work is properly cited and leaves 
the copyright of the article with the current copyright holder. 
- Ethical data collection and protection – All personal data (e.g., from multi -actor engagement activities) will be 
manged following ethical principles & informed consent, in compliance with the General Data Protection 
Regulation (Regulation (EU) 2016/ 679) and other applicable EU regulations ( the Regulation (EU) 2016/679, 
Directive 2002/58/EC, the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the EU (2000/c 364/01)). No sensitive information 
will be collected (e.g., health, sexual lifestyle, ethnicity, political opinion, religious or philosophical conviction). 
It will be limited to an extent strict ly necessary and proportionate to the project’s objectives.  Appropriate 
technical and organizational measures will be implemented to ensure a level of data security that is 
commensurate to the risks faced by the data subjects (unauthorized access, disclosu re, accidental deletion, or 
destruction of data). An Ethics principles document (e.g., including the ethical procedures for actor engagement) 
will be elaborated and submitted in M6.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Page 31 of 70 
2. IMP ACT 
 
2.1. Project’s pathways towards impact  
a) Project contributions towards topic expected outcomes 
Enhanced sustainability and circularity performance of bio-based systems realising a ‘zero-waste’, ‘zero-pollution’ 
ambition  & Integrated pollution prevention and control in bio-based systems of air, water, soil and noise  
Climate change mitigation:  SUSTAINEXT will increase factory resource efficiency by 27-29 %, as shown in section 
1.2.5. It will allow to increase production yield by 2-fold (Table 2.1), delivering double kg of products per feedstock 
ton. Besides, it will reduce by  35 %  of energy consumption in critical steps of the processes: extraction, 
concentration and drying. SUSTAINEXT will achieve a Net Zero Carbon (scope 1 and 2), as clearly calculated in the 
ex-ante study, derived from the transition from fossil -based energy (grid and natural gas) to new green energies 
(photovoltaics and biomass boiler). New crops in the project will allow to effectively fix carbon from the 
atmosphere. Current calculations show a fixation about 1,503 MT during the project. 
Circularity: Circular by design has been employed since the beginning of the project: more than 10,000 ton/year 
of agro-industrial side streams will be upcycled. Moreover, obtained bio-based fertilizers and biostimulants will go 
back to the crops to reduce their input needs and to restore carbon to the soil (see section 1.2.1 -III-). 
Zero waste: Main waste sources have been identified and measures to avoid waste have been proposed: DYANA 
will allow to valorise each feedstock prioritizing value (innovative healthy products > food and feed ingredients > 
biobased fertilizers > energy). With this cascaded use, 100 % of the employed feedstocks will be used. Extraction 
solvents will be maximally recirculated, efficient ethanol recovery through rectification will be achieved  reaching 
> 99,5% of recovery, with less than 0,5% lost as trace amounts in exhausted biomass; recirculation of 80% of water. 
SUSTAINEXTs’ partners, including the factory have a 100% recycling policy towards paper, plastic, electronic 
devices, etc. There is a minor point of waste generation in the lab. (representing < than 1%) and will be managed 
by authorized waste managers. 
Zero Pollution: SUSTAINEXT has a clear zero pollution ambition. As clearly established in the excellence section, 
critical emission points have been identified in the flagship and mitigation measures have been foreseen:   
- < 10 mg/Nm 3 of VOCs emissions (reduction of 80%, table 1.3) from the ethanol rectification tower will be 
reduced by replacing the water-cooling system with a new system that uses water-glycol mixtures and operates 
at much lower temperatures. An active carbon filter will also be used to reduce essentially all present VOCs.  
- Particle emissions will be reduced at the three emission points: Spray-dryer exit: use of a gas scrubber/washer 
that maximally reduces the emission of particles < 10 mg/Nm 3 (80% reduction). Installation of HEPA filters in 
clean rooms < 2 mg/Nm3 (90% reduction) and boilers < 10 mg/Nm3 (80% reduction) 
- Noise level: Noise panels will be installed in the refrigeration towers (the only noisy equipment in the plant), 
to reduce <35 dB noise level (50% reduction). 
- Wastewater: Wastewater will be reduced to <1 % with the deployment of reverse osmosis at the  WWTS 
(wastewater treatment station), producing clean water to be recirculated to the cooling towers. 
 
Revitalised communities of the bioeconomy by creating new green jobs and investments. 
Regional impact: Extremadura is a region belonging to the EU Convergence region (Objective 1). It has a long agro-
industrial tradition, and it has also implemented a sustainable development model, preserving its environment 
and natural resources. However, Extremadura is the least developed region in Spain (lowest HDI and lowest GDP 
per capita). The new flagship will be located in Hervás, a town of 4,000 inhabitants whose economy is based on 
tourism and agriculture. SUSTAINEXT’s impact in Hervás and Extremadura will be key in rural development. 
New green jobs: The implementation of SUSTAINEXT will have a direct impact on job creation within and outside 
the consortium. NATAC will directly create at least 230 new jobs (80 new jobs only in the Hervás region and 150 
direct jobs in other departments (operations, marketing, administration, R&D, etc.). Industrial implementation of 
agrivoltaics will have a great impact in job creation (agricultural engineers, farmers, logistics, processing, etc.). 500 
jobs are estimated in solar plants in Spain and Italy (ENEL ESP/ENEL ITA). New crops in tobacco fields will also 
create new jobs and , especially, prevent job destruction . Considering that tobacco  employs 3,800 direct and 
indirect jobs in Extremadura, only a 10 %  destruction prevention will count on 380 jobs. DOP will create at least 
50 direct new jobs in the exploitation of cardoon crops  and transformation. Industrial implementation of agro -
industrial side streams valorisation and replicat ion with new biomass by AGROS will also create 30-50 new jobs.  
End users, technology and know -how providers within the consortium will also create new jobs to exploit the 
know-how, products and formulations developed in SUSTAINEXT. A conservative estimation of 5 new jobs for each 
partner will result in additional 50 jobs. Overall, SUSTAINEXT aims to create more than 1,500 direct new green jobs 
only by partners within the consortium. 
 
 
 Page 32 of 70 
Job creation outside the consortium and along the value chain will be dramatically increased. Induced job has been 
estimated using the “multipliers for bioeconomy products in Spain methodology” 16, which establishes an average 
of 25 new jobs are created per 1 M€ of economic output in the bioeconomy sector in Spain. This estimation results 
in more than 4,875 new jobs derived from Natac economic outputs at year 5 after the project (195 M€).  Overall, 
this assessment foresees a potential creation of 6,300 new green jobs. 
Impact in Hervás: Hervás is a small town with a population 4,000 inhabitants with an economy based in tourism 
agriculture, and services. The impact of SUSTAINEXT in direct job will be key. Natac has already created 40 direct 
jobs in Hervás and SUSTAINEXT will create additional 230 new jobs (80 direct + 150 indirect). Hervás has an 
unemployment rate of 18,12 % in august 2022, with 324 people 17. Taking this figure into account, the impact of 
210 new jobs of the new centre could reduce unemployment by 65 % on the current figure, bringing net 
unemployment down to 6 %. Logically, this job creation will be probably shared by the towns nearby, but it 
represents the impact of SUSTAINEXT in a rural area. Moreover, a new flagship, with a high degree of innovation 
and international projection, will act as a driving force for the establishment of other industries in the area. 
Impact in tobacco industry: This industry is seekin g for new alternatives to the tobacco plant in order to remain 
viable. The impact of SUSTAINEXT in developing a new lucrative, sustainable and health promoting industry as an 
alternative to tobacco will have a major impact in the region. Considering MAPs production capacity and their 
approximate market value (Rosemary: 5 ton/ha & 8 00€/ton; Lemon Verbena: 5 ton/ha & 1,000 €/ton; camomile 
1 dry ton/ha & 3,000 €/ton), the average productivity per Ha can rise to average 4.000 €/ha. This is a very lucrative 
alternative to tobacco, which normally produces 2,000 €/ha. 
Impact in land use: Agrivoltaics represents a potential mitigation measure to increase soil use. Moreover, it holds 
several cultivation advantages (previously defined). The impact of argrivoltaics in Extremadura will be decisive, as 
Extremadura is, by far, the leading region in solar energy in  Spain18. According to the results so far, agrivoltaics 
production of rainfed rosemary can result in 2 ton/Ha, providing new business opportunities and job creation. 
Attract investment:  SUSTAINEXT will also foster investment in the bio -based sector at different levels:  i) the 
flagship construction has an estimated total cost of 20 M €, of which 50 % will be cofounded by the project 
Coordinator Natac, which has already invested 13,5 M€ in the state -of-the-art facility currently operating; ii) 
SUSTAINEXT will develop a regional innovation hub in Extremadura that will generate an attractive environment 
for the installation of other companies: auxiliary industry, agri -food industry, aromatic and medicinal plant 
industry, among others; iii) SUSTAINEXT as a sh owcase of a new model for the bio -based industry and will also 
drive investment in the transformation of the bio-based industry into a dynamic, digital environment. 
Additional impacts: i) promotion of an environment based on the creation of value through R&D&I, which acts as 
a driving force for other industries in the region and beyond (biotech industry, pharma, etc.); ii) opening and 
catalytic effect of access to international markets - internationalisation of the area; iii) promotion of the transfer 
of knowledge from public research bodies to the market. 
  
Public awareness and acceptance of bio-based solutions. 
Enhance transition towards circular bioeconomy: Policy makers and other relevant stakeholders’ engagement has 
been addressed since the beginning of the project idea  (President of Extremadura, Regional Agrifood Minister, 
Mayor of Hervas ), as described in the multi -actor approach section. As said, the multi -actor approach in 
SUSTAINEXT is key and will serve to showcase the achieved results to stakeholders along the whole value chain 
with special emphasis to policy makers, end users, the lo cal community, and investors. This will enhance public 
acceptance of bio-based solutions, will showcase how the green transition is a key business opportunity for new 
investments and for social benefits to the general community (see table 2.6) 
 
Deployed industrial symbiosis. 
Industrial Symbiosis:  SUSTAINEXT will establish EIGHT industrial symbioses: i) Olive by-products: produced by the 
olive industry, specifically olive leaves, olive fruit skin and OMWW, a significant source of environmental pollution, 
will be processed in VR -1 to VR -4; ii) In VR -4 fulvic acids will be produced from  OMWW concentrate fr ee of 
polyphenols and use as biostimulant in MAPs cultivation; iii) the artichoke canning industries reject the external 
bracts of artichoke, making them a by -product of this industry. SUSTAINEXT will process this by -product in VR-5 
and 6; iv) pomegranate juice industries generate a pomegranate peel residue that will be processed in SUSTAINEXT 
VR-8; v) DOP cultivates cardoon produce a cheese curdling agent from cardoon blossom and discarding the rest of 
the plant. This by-product will be used in SUSTAINEXT VR-7; vi) Exhausted feedstock from VRs will be used by BIOM 
 
16 Journal of Cleaner Production 298 (2021) 126752. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.126752 
17 https://datosmacro.expansion.com/paro/espana/municipios/extremadura/caceres/hervas 
18 https://www.eleconomista.es/empresas-finanzas/noticias/11712962/04/22/Extremadura-es-la-region-que-mas-energia-produce-con-fotovoltaicas.html 
 
 
 Page 33 of 70 
to develop biobased fertilizers and specific formulations adapted to SUSTAINEXT crops; vii) WWTS (wastewater 
treatment station) slurries  represent a minor waste (<1%). However, as an additional industrial symbiosis, this 
waste will be sent to Metanogenia (Extremadura), a company expert in biogas production to assess its potential 
valorisation; viii) finally, ENEL/ES will study the possibility of supplying the biorefinery with electric energy from 
the photovoltaic panels installed in the agrivoltaic systems where the crops for SUSTAINEXT will be cultivated. 
 
Support market uptake growth and acceptance of scalable bio-based solutions 
New value chains: As first direct economic impact, six new industrial bio-based supply chains will be created with 
the objective to gain competitiveness, to address new markets and make current ones more economically 
sustainable. As it is shown in the BP, the new flagship will gain competitiveness through a dramatic reduction in 
costs and an increase in factory outputs (yield, multi-product) with a dynamic approach allowing to address specific 
market needs. This direct imp act will be fostered through target brand owners within the consortium and also 
through external end users that have shown interest through LoIs. Moreover, Natac, coordinator of SUSTAINEXT 
and future owner of the solution, already has a strong position on the market which also warrantees the market 
uptake of proposed solutions.  
New opportunities for the primary sector:  SUSTAINEXT will develop new value chains with a strong involvement 
of the primary sector. First, the tobacco industry will validate new alternative crops to tobacco plant, with 
enhanced sustainability and a positive impact on people’s health (from cigarettes to medicinal plants). SUSTAINEXT 
will upcycle three agro -industrial side streams, increasing its value and creating new income for three key 
European industries (olive, artichoke, and pomegranate). Moreover, in a post -project stage, this model will be 
further replicated by Natac and other biomass operators with new agro-industrial biomasses 
A model designed to be integrally replicable: Showcasing a first-of-its-kind large scale industrial biorefinery for the 
bio-based industry: SUSTAINEXT will showcase an innovative sustainable and replicable model. SUSTAINEXT will 
have a direct transforming impact not only in the botanical ingredients industry, but also in a transversal way to 
other bio-based industries that could benefit from the innovat ive TRL 8 model of dynamic biorefinery based on 
feedstock composition modulation, valorisation routes and production on demand.  
One of the main priorities of  SUSTAINEXT project was to ensure a high model replicability. In this line, all the 
employed methodology, including the technologies and processes in the DYANA biorefinery have been designed 
to offer great versatility in the future. This technology will be replicated in the future for a wide range of additional 
feedstocks (side streams from winemaking, citruses, avocado, other fruits and vegetables, dozens of MAPs).  
Moreover, as demanded in the AWP,  we will d emonstrate the replicability of  SUSTAINEXT by conducting 
replication studies under different assumptions at a proof-of-concept level. We will demonstrate the replicability 
of SUSTAINEXT with feedstocks from different location and with different  feedstock source s to warranty the 
replicability for i) other plant-based manufacturers (more than 500 companies in Europe ) and ii) other agro -
industrial biomass. 
 Replicability proofs of concept during SUSTAINEXT (Task 3.7): 
- 6 proofs of concept with feedstocks of different origin: Batches of the 6 feedstocks from different locations will 
be used to demonstrate the model replicability regardless of feedstock origin and variations in quality.  
- 3 proofs of concept with different feedstocks: wine making side-streams (skin, seeds), avocado seed, and a new 
MAP ( echinacea from project PAMQ in collaboration between TABEX, CTAEX and NATAC ) will be used to 
demonstrate SUSTAINEXT replicability with different types of feedstocks. 
 
High added-value products:  
The prices distribution per Kg product of 46 plant -based healthy extracts to be obtained in SUSTAINEXT are the 
following: 8 of them have a price lower than 20 €/kg; 15 of them are in the range of 20 to 60 €/Kg; 14 in the range 
of 60 to 150 €/Kg; 4 of them in the range of 150 to 3 00 €/Kg; finally, 5 have a price higher than 300 €/Kg. Those  
products from more advanced processing levels in the VRs such as Oleuropein 80%, Elenolic acid, Oleanolic acid, 
Hydroxytyrosol 60%; Punicalagins 70%, etc., have the highest prices, since these are highly refined products of very 
high added value. 
An interesting analysis to demonstrate the scale of economic impact of this project will have the comparison of yields 
in Kg bioproduct and estimated economic turnover per ton of feedstock for each of the products produced today in 
the linear, mono-product oriented workflow with the same product when produced in the dynamic biorefinery (Table 
2.1). In table 2.1 the mass balances per yield of product in each model, current and SUSTAINEXT, are compared. In 
this table, the Kg of bioproducts obtained and the total turnover per ton of feedstock are shown. 
To give an example, in VR -1 (Fig. 2 .1), current production of 268 Kg of Oleuropein 20% will be converted to 6 
bioproducts, without considering the PFF/biobased fertilizers, that sum up a total of 629 Kg of bioproducts, an 
 
 
 Page 34 of 70 
increase of 131%, as shown in the table. This increase is a result of two factors: first, an improved FSI of the biomass 
from applying pre-treatments, and second, due to the multi-product, cascade-based utilisation of the feedstock.  
 
Table 2.1 yield and turnover improvement. 
 
 
In terms of economic impact, in this same example, the extraction of 1 Ton of olive leaves 
in VR-1 will switch from 9.004 € to 28.330 €, an increase of 220%. In a similar manner, the 
yields in Kg of products and economic turnover per MT of feedstock have been calculated 
for the rest of the SUSTAINEXT feedstocks of each VR . The average results of the 12 VRs 
indicate that SUSTAINEXT will increment 125% the yield of bioproducts (160 kg to 360 Kg) 
and 120% the economic turnover (from 7,140 € to 15,697 €) per ton of extracted 
feedstock.  
 
Dynamic analysis: towards maximal energy efficiency, sustainability, and economic performance: 
Taking the same example of VR -1 analysis described above and expressing it in an estimation of EBIT, an olive leaf 
linear flow will render 3642 € (40%) EBIT per ton, compared to an estimated EBIT of 14.784 € (52%)  for a multi -
product, cascaded VR-1. At the same time, even though it is undeniable that the cascade approach is more efficient, 
as supported by the calculations, it has to be considered that the cascade-based model is not perfect and will be less 
efficient if the multi -product-oriented workflow is no adapted to the intrinsic characteristics of each batch of 
feedstock, related to the concept of the feedstock suitability index – FSI.  
Considering previous example for olive VR1, t hree scenarios are presented for three different olive leaf biomass 
batches of various qualities: FSI 0.4; FSI 0.7 and FSI 0.9, to be utilized following the processing scheme of VR-1 (table 
2.2). Our disruptive model of Dynamic Analysis optimizes the use of each batch according to its  FSI. Olive leaves of 
very high quality (FSI=0,9) are optimal to reach more advanced stages in VR-1’s processing scheme to obtain products 
of elevated productive costs and high profitability in the most efficient manner: Oleuropein 80% and Elenolic acid 
20% (25% - 31 Kg). On the contrary, the batch with FSI 0.4 should stay in the primary stages of VR -1, as only 5% (2 
kg) of this batch can reach the final stage of this route. In the same mode, the extraction of 1 MT of olive leaves with 
FSIs of 0.4; 0.7 and 0.9 presents an estimated EBIT of 6.683 € (48%); 13.491 € (52%) and 20.485 € (58%) respectively, 
and an estimated energy consumption of 1,4; 2,1 and 2,8 kWh/kg produced.  
 
Table 2.2 Yield and turnover improvement for VR-1 for feedstocks with different FSI values. 
 
 
If our Smart Dynamic Analytical Biorefinery (DYANA) was not able to conduct this dynamic analysis based in the FSI 
of the feedstock, it would be a much less efficient model, both economically and energetically,  and consequently, 
less sustainable. Relevant to the example, attempting to process an olive leaf batch with FSI 0.4 with the same 
workflow distribution as one with FSI 0.9 would be an aberration in terms of costs, energy consumption and pollution. 
VR Current 
model
SUSTAINEX 
model
Current 
model
SUSTAINEX 
model
VR-1 268 619 131% 9.005 € 28.833 € 220%
VR-2 61 204 234% 3.806 € 22.636 € 495%
VR-3 220 281 28% 7.700 € 10.735 € 39%
VR-4 41 263 541% 1.840 € 4.409 € 140%
VR-5 200 450 125% 4.080 € 11.718 € 187%
VR-6 203 985 385% 8.282 € 15.086 € 82%
VR-7 0 230 0 € 4.988 €
VR-8 101 209 107% 9.454 € 15.078 € 59%
VR-9 278 452 63% 10.675 € 22.260 € 109%
VR-10 69 153 122% 4.554 € 16.032 € 252%
VR-11 175 290 66% 14.490 € 24.577 € 70%
VR-12 144 175 22% 4.666 € 12.024 € 158%
Kg bioproducts 
 per MT feedstock 
Turnover €
per MT  feedstock% %
Bioproduct 
obtained
Main-
stream %
Kg obtained 
per MT 
Main-
stream %
Kg obtained 
per MT 
Main-
stream %
Kg obtained 
per MT 
Oleuropein 20% 70% 210 55% 303 10% 50
Oleuropein 40% 20% 30 25% 68 40% 100
Oleuropein 80% 5% 2 10% 14 25% 31
Elenolic acid 20% 5% 2 10% 14 25% 31
Triterpenoids 15% - 56 - 100 - 100
Chlorophills - 60 - 120 - 120
Dynamic analysis 
optimized for FSI=0,7
Dynamic analysis 
optimized for FSI=0,9
Dynamic analysis 
optimized for FSI=0,4
Figure 2.1 VR-1 mass balance 
 
 
 Page 35 of 70 
Task 2.4.3 will be dedicated to the scale up of an algorithm to conduct dynamic analyses in the DYANA biorefinery. 
This algorithm will ensure the optimal use of each feedstock batch according to its FSI and all previous production 
parameters, including emissions, to minimize the environmental impact and comply with market demands.   
In conclusion, the developed model presents a double technological advancement that multiplies SUSTAINEXT 
economic and sustainability impact: i ) converting a linear flow (1 product) to a cascaded flow (6 products); ii) 
employing a Dynamic Analysis algorithm to optimize the processing scheme and quantity of product to be obtained 
depending on the FSI of each batch of feedstock, giving the model a high degree of sustainability and profitability. 
The result is built-in in the very SUSTAINEXT project, a flagship model that deploys a new disruptive concept in the 
production practices of plant extracts.    
 
Biodiversity: The lot where the flagship is lo cated can be found in the proximity of Red Natura 2000 territory, 
particularly the SPA La Granadilla (ES4320013). However, no part of this lot is located within the abovementioned 
SPA. Being aware of the value (natural capital) possessed by the ecosystem w e make part of, we wish to promote 
sustainable tourism and the economic development of the area, while protecting the fauna and flora of the Ambroz 
Valley. First, becoming NetZero and zero emissions is the main contribution to sustain the natural area wher e the 
plant is located; second, noise levels will be reduced far below the legal limits to protect fauna around and contribute 
maintaining the commitment of Hervas to rural sustainable tourism; thirdly, SUSTAINEXT will foster the preservation 
of particular olive cultivar varieties typical in geographical zones of the Mediterranean (such as Manzanilla Cacereña) 
that have a unique phytochemical composition for the production of differentiated and high added-value products. 
 
Impact for partners within the consortium 
 
SUSTAINEXT covers the whole value chain and will have a positive impact on every partner in the consortium. 
PARTNER MAIN ROLE POSITIVE IMPACT ON CONSORTIUM PARTNERS 
NATAC 
Flagship 
construction 
and 
exploitation  
SUSTAINEXT will have a significant impact in company’s transition to NetZero 
Carbon, while allowing to large scale deploy a disruptive biorefining concept 
(DYANA) which will consolidate the leading position of the com pany in the 
botanical ingredient sector. 
AGROS  
 
Smart supply 
chain 
SUSTAINEXT will have a direct impact on agro -industrial biomass upcycling. 
AGROS will find new and profitable uses for its biomass, while acquiring the 
needed technology and know-how to improve the quality of target compounds.  
TABEX, DOP 
Smart supply 
chain – 
primary sector 
SUSTAINEXT will have a key impact in the primary sector of Extremadura. It will 
foster the valorisation of cardoon, key crop for the DOP. TABEX will find new 
profitable alternatives to tobacco crops, improving the sustainability  
ENEL Agrivoltaics SUSTAINEXT will contribute to deploy MAPs cultivation in agrivoltaics, to improve 
soil use while creating additional business opportunities for ENEL. 
CTAEX, 
UNITO 
Crops upscale 
and product 
validation 
SUSTAINEXT RTOs within the consortium will develop new knowledge in the field 
of cultivation (CTAEX) and functional testing for animal nutrition (UNITO). The 
acquired knowledge may be susceptible to patenting or licencing to the industry..  
ARRAM Engineering 
SUSTAINEXT will allow ARRAM to gain new expertise in biorefinery designing, 
especially with the sustainability approach here envisioned (NetZero, zero waste, 
zero pollution, etc.). Moreover, collaboration with IRIS will allow to create new 
business opportunities by including in their services sensor technologies.  
STAR, 
CAND, 
MIAVIT, 
MBL, NUT, 
BIOM 
End users 
SUSTAINEXT will provide new and disruptive bio -based products with direct 
application in targeted markets. SUSTAINEXTs’ end users will benefit from close 
relation with product developers and specific solutions to current challenges. 
Additionally, the status of NetZero products will make a great difference in the 
market, highly aware of the importance of sustainable products.  
ECO Impact 
assessment 
SUSTAINEXT will provide ECO with new expertise in sustainability assessments in 
a new disruptive biorefining model.  
IRIS Sensor 
technology 
SUSTAINEXT will allow IRIS to find new applications for their sensor technologies. 
This will represent future business opportunities in the bio-based industry. 
BIOPLAT, 
FUNCYT 
Dissemination & 
Communication 
(D&C), 
stakeholder 
engagement 
SUSTAINEXT is totally aligned with BIOPLAT, who aims to develop the biomass 
sector in Spain. The project will provide BIOPLAT a success case easily replicable 
by other bio -based industries in Spain and Europe. FUNCYT’s mission is to 
contribute to the social and economic exploitation of science and technology in 
 
 
 Page 36 of 70 
Extremadura. SUSTAINEXT will have a key impact in Extremadura, totally aligned 
with FUNCYT’s main aim.  
 
b) Project contributions towards the CBE JU annual work programme and Strategic Research and Innovation 
Agenda (SRIA) 
Strategic priority 2.1.2 Deploy innovative production technologies. 
The pre-treatments that will be applied on the feedstocks increase the concentration of bioactive compounds and 
improve the extractability of these compounds witho ut altering the intrinsic functionalities of the feedstock. The 
extractive and purification processes in DYANA are gentle on the feedstock and isolate bioactive compounds without 
altering its chemical composition. SUSTAINEXTs’ technologies are environmentally sustainable and versatile, and will 
enable processing various, economically viable feedstocks in the future. Digitalization is equally important, essential 
for environmental control, improving the energy efficiency and advancing towards our zero-emissions ambition.   
 
Strategic priority 2.1.4 Build policymakers’ awareness and acceptance of bio-based solutions.  
SUSTAINEXT is a project that can count on the support and acceptance of policy makers from its conceiving. This is 
clearly evident in the attached LoIs, that illustrate institutional support at all levels. Mr. Guillermo Fernández Vara 
(President of Extremadura ), Ms. Begoña García ( Regional Minister for Agriculture, Rural Development, Population 
and Territory Councillor of Agriculture) and Ms. Patricia Valle (Mayor of Hervás) have all signed letters to show the 
strong commitment of the region towards this challenging project. These LoI and others made available in the project 
proposal are direct evidence of the capacity of the consortium to connect with big policymakers in Extremadura and 
demonstrate their acceptance of circular, bio-based solutions across Spain.  
 
Strategic priority 3.1.2 - Incorporate the environmental sustainability and circularity criteria in bio-based systems.  
SUSTAINEXT will set a real example of the feasibility of deploying a circular and sustainable biorefinery able to create 
value from various types of agro -industrial by-products. Furthermore, it will prove the compatibility of this model 
with a zero-emissions ambition featuring sustainably -sourced feedstocks. SUSTAINEXT’s multi-actor approach will 
make sure this message is transmitted to all the relevant actors in the value chain, from the local community to 
government representatives, consume r associations, brand owners and technology suppliers. In other words, 
SUSTAINEXT will confirm the viability of implementing good environmental sustainability and circularity practices to 
all relevant actors in Extremadura and the rest of the plant-based healthy ingredients and similar European sectors. 
 
Strategic priority 3.1.3 – Facilitate social acceptance of bio-based applications.  
Our communication strategy has been specifically tailored to convey the benefits of an industrial model as DYANA to 
the consumers and citizens, a model able to generate value from by-products, potentiate the cultivation of MAPs in 
disadvantaged areas like agrivoltaics and disused tobacco fields, all while employing a circular and sustainable model. 
SUSTAINEXT will contribute in producing this cultural and behavioural change, and social acceptance of bio -based 
models. The sector of plant -based, healthy ingredients is largely directed to health and environmentally -conscious 
populations with special awareness of the importance sustainability. Accordingly, this population will immediately 
become aware of this new cultural change necessary to be transmitted to the general society, so that the consumers 
can come to appreciate the inclusion of plant-based healthy ingredients as a part of their everyday lives, and as highly 
sustainable and environmentally-friendly solutions. 
 
CBE JU Key Performance Indicators 
KPI 2 - Unlock sustainable and circular bio -based feedstock for the industry . SUSTAINEXT will enable 6 new bio -
based value chains based on 6 sustainably-sourced feedstocks: 3 currently underexploited agro-industrial side and 
3 industrial crops. These feedstocks will be employed to produce 46 plant-based healthy extracts for 6 industries 
(food, feed, nutraceuticals, cosmetics, chemical performance, and biobased fertilizers).  
KPI 3 - Ensure environmental sustainability of feedstocks. 3.2 Use of feedstocks generated with practices aiming 
at zero-pollution (soil, water, air) and/or at reducing water consumption: SUSTAINEXT will contribute to the EU 
Zero Pollution and toxic-free environment ambitions by two main actions as describe in section 1.2.1.