3.3 Using feedsto cks generated with practices contributing to climate change mitigation and/or adaptation : 
SUSTAINEXT will improve climate related impacts as describe in section 1.2.1. 
KPI 4 - Improve environmental sustainability of bio-based production processes and value chains.
4.1 Innovative & sustainable processes that contribute to GHG emission reduction: i) Product carbon footprint will 
be reduced by 100 % as shown in section 1.2.5; ii) Reduction in GHG by green energy production (photovoltaics 
and biomass boiler); iii) Energy efficient systems implemented in the new factory (sec 1.2.3.1 (1)). 
 
 
 Page 37 of 70
4.2 Developing innovative & sustainable processes that improve resource efficiency and zero wast e: i) Use of 
industrial side streams as feedstocks (upcycling); ii) Developing a dynamic analysis cascade approach with 12 
valorisation routes for the complete utilisation of all feedstocks ensuring zero waste.
4.3 Developing innovative & sustainable proce sses enabling to address zero pollution : Specific actions will be 
implemented to reduce pollution: i) solid waste; ii) air; iii) water; iv) soil and v) noise (see sec 1.2.3.1).
4.4 Innovative & sustainable processes with improved energy efficiency :  Energ y efficiency by design has been 
considered in the proposal (sec 1.2.3.1 (1)).
4.5 Improving life cycle environmental performance:  Products obtained in the new biorefinery will present 
reduction of 100% carbon footprint according to LCA. 
KPI 5 - Expand cir cularity in bio -based value chains. 5.2 Developing circular production practises (including 
industrial & industrial urban symbiosis) : i) 3 of the feedstocks used in this biorefinery are underexploited side 
streams from other industries; ii) Side streams produced in this project will be further valorised as biobased 
fertilizers and/or food/feed ingredients and bioenergy. 
KPI 7 - Improve the market uptake of bio -based products - Brand owners involved as project partners and/or 
engaged with other mechanisms: i) 6 brand owners from target sectors (nutraceutical, food, feed, cosmetic) are 
partners in this project; ii) Multi-actor approach will en sure to consider additional stakeholders in the project, 
including additional brand owners out of the consortium.  
 
c) Requirements and potential barriers 
FINANCIAL 
BARRIER: Investment needed to cofound the Flagship. 
SOLUTION: As explained in the BP, Natac as coordinator of the proposal and responsible of flagship co -
financing has a totally solid financial situation which will warrantee the resources for the factory. 
BARRIER: High current assets to cover operations until SUSTAINEXT products reach the market.   
SOLUTION: Combination of ready -to-market and medium time -to-market products will reduce cash -flow 
tensions. Moreover, Natac as coordinator has a solid financia l position to cover the needed circulant 
cashflow.  
PRODUCTION 
BARRIER: Flagship will need to process new feedstocks.    
SOLUTION: SUSTAINEXT will design a versatile and adaptable configuration that will be able to extract a wide 
variety of plant-based phytochemicals from different feedstocks.  
BARRIER: Future water limitations derived from climate change/water shortages may limit the operations in 
the factory. 
SOLUTION: Current processes have been designed with a 80 % water recovery/reuse, minimizing the risk of 
water scarcity in the factory,  
MARKET UPTAKE 
BARRIER: Current market demand foreseen in the BP may differ from future real demands. Market may 
demand different products from the ones foreseen in the BP.  
SOLUTION: DYANA is a dynamic system which can optimize the factory performance to meet real market 
demands. Besides, SUSTAINEXT will deliver 46 plant -based healthy extracts and functional ingredients, 
representing a very diversified model and assuring market feasibility. 
BARRIER: Innovative products and formulations may require scientific efficacy support in order to enter the 
market 
SOLUTION: End users within the project will perform the necessary validation testing to be ready to be 
marketed at the end of the project. 
BARRIER: Extracts and ingredients with different innovation degrees may require a different time to market. 
SOLUTION:  SUSTAINEXT will deliver 46 plant -based healthy extracts and functional ingredients: 21 are 
commodities that will enter fast in the market (also considering SUSTAINEXT USP: cost, quality/traceability, 
sustainability). 12 are newly produced in Europe (imported from APAC), but with moderate presence in the 
European market, which will enter the market gradually. The last 13 are totally new on the market and will 
require additional marketing effort but will allow to differentiate from the competence. This strategy 
warrantees the business opportunity of the proposed solution. 
BARRIER: Current herbal extract and bioproduct competence - Competitive cost/prices of the final products  
SOLUTION: SUSTAINEXT will beat the competence by producing cost -effective ingredients, with 
quality/traceability guaranteed and more sustainable (neutral carbon footprint). 
REG
ULA
TOR
Y BARRIER: Commercialization of certain bioproducts may need previous authorization processes by the 
European Food Safety Agency (EFSA) or the European Medicine Agency (EMA), which are long and expensive 
 
 
 Page 38 of 70 
SOLUTION: to guarantee the economic feasibility of SUSTAINEXT from the very beginning, product 
commercialization will be gradual, and it will start by the industries where regulatory status is already 
approved such as food supplements, cosmetics, pharmaceutical and chemical industries.  
BARRIER: Regulatory limitations to produce energy with biomass coming from hydroalcoholic extraction 
which can be considered a waste and require additional licenses. 
SOLUTION: The new desolventization unit will improve alcohol recovery to 99,5 %, ensuring. If needed, Natac 
will conduct the necessary licensing process.   
BARRIER: Process patents can be weak and sometimes self -defeating considering the detailed explanation 
given in patent description.  
SOLUTION: An in-depth patenting analysis will be conducted throughout the project to evaluate the risk -
benefit assessment of patenting. Secret know-how will also be evaluated.  
SOCIAL BARRIERS 
BARRIER: Tobacco farmers is a very conservative sector and can be reluctant to change into new crops. 
SOLUTION: SUSTAINEXT will showcase and demonstrate a lucrative business case which will serve as a 
practical example for future farmers. Moreover, TABACOEX as a cooperative that encompasses many farmers 
will also play an important role in moving farmers to new health-promoting crops. 
BARRIER: Hervas and local community may be reluctant to the installation of an industry in a region which 
main industry is sustainable and ecotourism.   
SOLUTION: The Materiality assessment already conducted, together with the multi -actor approach 
methodology will assure to align community priorities with industrial development. Besides, the factory that 
is already installed has demonstrated a positive impact for the community and the new flagship will showcase 
an example of environmental responsibility, totally aligned with community priorities.  
 
Business case and business model 
The worldwide plant-based extracts market has been valued at 23.7 billion in 2019  and is expected to reach $59.4 
billion by 2025, growing at a Compound Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) of 16.5% for the 2019-2025 period. A total of 4 
main market segments are targeted through the project, consisting of the food supplements, food ingredients, pet 
and feed additives, cosmetics and performance chemicals verticals.  
A complete business plan is included as an annex. In regard to the impact of SUSTAINEXT-derived turnover to the 
overall revenue generation of NATAC, we estimate it will enable the company to step-up its leadership positioning 
within the plant -based extract s and to set a foothold in emerging markets , such as APAC, while strengthening 
operations in Europe and North America.  
SUSTAINEXT entry into operation is expected by mid -2027, while the first sales are expected by the beginning of 
2028. All in all, we exp ect the extracts revenue stream to grow from the 19.08M€ in 2022 to more than 194.71M€ 
by 2032, representing a Compound Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) of +26.15% for the 10-year forecasted period. 
In parallel, costs will be greatly improved which will further i mpact on net profit. Net Profit is set to increase at a 
sustained positive rate to reach 94.11M€ by the end of the forecasted period, as scale up is achieved, and market 
demand grows. In parallel, the Net Profit Margin will be greatly improved scaling up f rom 17.58% as of 2022 to 
48,33% by 2032, as a result of an economy of scale and a more integrated and efficient value chain. 
For the foreseen 10 -year forecasted period (2022 -2032) the SUSTAINEXT project is estimated to deliver positive 
profitability performance. The Net Present Value  (NPV) for the 10 -Year forecasted period has been estimated in 
271.33 million €,  considering a Weighted Average Cost of Capital (WACC) of 7,04% (current NATAC’s value as of 
2022), and a positive Internal Rate of Return (IRR) of 64.59%. The project’s expected Return on Investment (ROI) is 
of 26,67. The evolution of revenue, EBITDA and net profit is shown in figure 2.2. 
 
Figure 2.2 Revenue, EBITDA and net margin evolution. 

 
 
 Page 39 of 70 
End users’ business case: 
- STAR (food): In collaboration with the SUSTAINEXT project, Star plans to diversify its portfolio and strengthen its 
functional food line. The extracts that we will provide to the market will be used to create a children’s tea. In 
this way, the company expects to increase its turnover by x2-x4 times. 
 
- NUTRARESEARCH (Nutraceutical): During 2020, Nutrasearch achieved an EBITDA of 439K thanks to its extensive 
knowledge and service in the supply of nutritional products in the pharma, food, and animal industries. In order 
to continue on the path of growth in an increasingly competitive market, SUSTAINEXT will provide the company 
with a portfolio of plant -based extracts that it previously needed to import from other regions, mainly from 
APAC. In this way, the company expects to increase its EBITDA ratio by x3-x5 by 2028. 
 
- MIBELLE GROUP (cosmetic): Mibelle's busine ss model focuses exclusively plant -based cosmetics production, 
such as provided by NATAC. In order to carry out the production of its portfolio, Mibelle is forced to import bio 
compounds that are currently not produced in the European market. SUSTAINEXT will allow us to supply our 
present and future stakeholders with plant -based extracts that arise from the optimisation of feedstocks, 
passing on the low production costs to their prices. In this way, Mibelle will see a 10-25% reduction in production 
costs from 2028 onwards. 
 
- ACEL (PET): ACEL is one of the leading suppliers of nutrition/pharma products for animals. However, in the face 
of stricter legislation and the need to provide healthier products, ACEL has been innovating in recent years with 
products produced from natural ingredients. This has been reflected in its business growth, as its turnover has 
increased by 45% in the last 5 years, reaching a turnover of over €20M. In collaboration with SUSTAINEXT, ACEL 
plans to diversify its portfolio with organic products and thus plans a turnover growth x 3 over the next 10 years. 
 
- MIAVIT GMBH (feed additives): By collaborating with NATAC, Miavit will gain access to new natural ingredients 
that have been successfully tested on different types of farm animals to improve not only overall animal health 
but also production yields. Miavit is another stakeholder that will feel the positive effect of our new production 
model. Margins and sales are expected to doble as a result of including plant-based healthy ingredients in their 
products for the next 10 years. 
 
Figure 2.3 SUSTAINEXT business model canvas. 
 
 
 

 
 
 Page 40 of 70 
2.2. Measures to maximise impact - Dissemination, exploitation, and communication  
In order to raise interest in the SUSTAINEXT project, the consortium has drafted a preliminary Plan for Dissemination 
Communication, and Exploitation of the Results . This initial version shown in this proposal is based on the 
contribution of all partners and relies on a multifactor approach. It includes a description of the targeted groups 
within the project and the specific channels, messages and tools used to reach them, aiming to promote the results 
of the project. In this Plan, the consortium will add quantifiable KPIs for each action proposed, with the objective to 
assess the success of the projects’ dissemination, exploitation and communication activities.  
 
2.2.1. Dissemination and communication 
Dissemination 
The dissemination of the project and its results aims to develop a strategy to promote awareness of the SUSTAINEXT 
project and facilitate further use of its results among all identified targeted audiences by means  of customised 
messages and actions. Moreover, dissemination will allow for the creation of tailor -made channels, tools, and 
targeted actions for each of the links in the value chain (audiences), focusing on facilitating social acceptance of bio-
based applications and building policymakers' awareness and acceptance of bio-based solutions. This includes raising 
awareness via consumer engagement and D&C actions, to be implemented in several WPs. The project will focus on 
the target audience described in Table 2.3. 
Table 2.3 SUSTAINEXT’s target audience, description, and significance. 
TARGET GROUPS DESCRIPTION SIGNIFICANCE 
Agricultural sector 
European agricultural and 
farmers sector (including 
feedstock logistics and 
supply chains) 
The target value chain is related to the development of 
activities to disseminate the potential of the targeted 
feedstocks, their challenges, and opportunities.  
Bio-based 
industries 
International, European or 
national companies  
The target group corresponds to early adopters of the 
proposed technologies and concept, and potential producers 
of biobased products. Also, this target group links directly 
with the project’s objectives as this target group constitutes 
users for the results of this project. 
Biobased products 
users 
End-users (e.g., 
(bio)chemical industry, 
food/feed, cosmetic 
industry) 
The target group links with the direct use of biobased 
products as high-added value components for other 
products. This group has the potential to use the project’s 
final biobased products. 
Equipment 
manufacturers and 
engineering 
companies 
Reproducers of the 
equipment and 
technologies used and 
developed with the project 
The target groups relate to equipment building and adaption 
as foreseen in SUSTAINEXT. Beyond the project’s life span, 
this target group is essential for the market uptake of the 
proposed technological solutions. 
Universities and 
research institutes 
Technology centers and 
universities in Europe 
Target group able to use and implement research work 
developed by the project beyond SUSTAINEXT’s time span 
Citizens General society and 
community members 
Multiple audiences to promote the benefits and solutions of 
SUSTAINEXT increasing understanding of biobased 
solutions/products and changes to fundamental habits and 
the environment 
Investors Financial stakeholders and 
funding schemes  
To connect with potential stakeholders interested in 
SUSTAINEXT’s technologies and solutions 
Authorities 
(international, 
European, national, 
regional, local) 
Policymakers and 
regulatory bodies (decision-
makers) 
The amendment of policies and measures if necessary or the 
development of new initiatives 
 
Phase I of the dissemination strategy will be raising the interest among target audiences and final end -users/ 
adopters. Dissemination actions will include a multi-actor approach (as described in section 1.2.4) that will increase 
public awareness and acceptance of bio-based solutions and market uptake growth by quantifying and showcasing 
the achievements and challenges of the project and its potential to scale up and replicate in other territories; and, 
consequently, widen benefits for society and the environment. Table 2. 4 covers the minimal actions and planned 
KPIs to be performed within SUSTAINEXT. 
 
 
 
 Page 41 of 70 
 
Table 2.4 Overall dissemination minimal actions planned for SUSTAINEXT. 
ACTION 1 Scientific-Technical & Industrial/ Guidance video 
CHANNEL Online, YouTube DATE M45 WHO BIO KPI 1000 views 
PURPOSE Project concept, results and potential benefits for climate and society addressed by an (animated) 
Introductory/Conceptual video; the Scientific-Technical & Industrial/ Guidance video aims to disseminate the new 
agri-industrial integrated concept, zero waste and zero emissions, and the new bio-based products produced 
ACTION 2 Project e-newsletters 
CHANNEL Online DATE M6-M48 WHO BIO KPI 1 e-newsletters per year (4 in total) 
PURPOSE To disseminate the progress and achievements of the project during its implementation. Targeted to the 
specific sectors covered by the project 
ACTION 3 Final public report on evolution, advances and results 
CHANNEL Online DATE M54 WHO BIO KPI 1 report 
PURPOSE Show the overall progress and performance of the project and share outcomes, experiences, etc. to promote 
replicability in other European regions 
ACTION 4 Final conference 
CHANNEL Hybrid (Face -to-face 
and remote) 
DATE M54 WHO BIO KPI +200 attendees 
PURPOSE Information on the main outcomes of SUSTAINEXT, highlighting the potential of replicating and scaling up this new 
concept of circular, integrated and dynamic biorefinery, zero waste and zero emissions.  
ACTION 5 Attendance at workshops, seminars, and conferences 
CHANNEL Hybrid (Face -to-face 
and remote) 
DATE >M6 WHO All KPI 8 events. Including as exhibitors in 
Vitafoods (EUR/ASIA) & Supply Side West. 
PURPOSE Aiming to share knowledge and participate in discussions within the agricultural sector and the bio-based industries 
in relevant agri-, circular economy and environmental events, while promoting SUSTAINEXT 
ACTION 6 Scientific publications 
CHANNEL Online/ offline DATE M48 WHO All KPI 3 scientific publications 
PURPOSE Targeting the scientific-technical and industrial communities in SUSTAINEXT’s areas of knowledge  
ACTION 7 Publications in sectorial magazines 
CHANNEL Hybrid (Face-to-face 
and remote) 
DATE >M9 WHO All KPI 4 publications 
PURPOSE Biomass Magazine, Horizon, Bioenergy Insight, and BE Sustainable 
 
The effectiveness and degree of completion of the dissemination activities will be reviewed according to a set of 
qualitative and quantitative performance indicators (i.e., number of publications, visits to the website, followers on 
social media, active in volvement of consortium partners to provide relevant technical content and re -sharing to 
increase visibility). Phase II of the dissemination strategy will be focused on the exploitation-oriented dissemination 
of results, which will start once the experimen tal phase has been carried out, and some preliminary data has been 
obtained.  
 
Communication 
To reach the general public and maximise SUSTAINEXT’s impact, a communication strategy containing a variety of 
communication activities, aimed at specific targets has been put in place by BIOPLAT, as D&C manager. The main aim 
of the project’s communication strategy is to build a solid structure of messages , content, resources, and actions 
about the project’s general activities: What is SUSTAINEXT? What challenges does it face? What does it do? What 
benefits for climate and society can be induced by SUSTAINEXT? (Table 2.5) with the aim to quantify and showcase 
the achievements and challenges of the project to national/regional stakeholders and policymakers. For this reason, 
the specific goals of the communication strategy are:  
- Effectively communicate to all the identified audiences the aim of the project, it s overall objectives, the why of 
its strategic opportunity and the different parties that are collaborating and working together to make it possible.  
- Deliver solid messages and information about the scientific-technical and industrial fundamentals of SUSTAINEXT, 
and its capacities to contribute to circularity, energy transition and mitigation of the climate change; involving 
target audiences and seeking to engage them in the process. 
- Provide information about the project’s technological and industrial solutions, progress, and outcomes across all 
links of the value chain to all audiences and project partners, building unified content and actions.  
- Target not only the audiences described in the “dissemination of the project”, but also a broader group of general 
audiences, including non-technical and non-professional groups, such as consumers, citizens, and NGOs.  
 
 
 Page 42 of 70 
 
 
Table 2.5. SUSTAINEXT’s general initial messages. 
What is the 
SUSTAINEXT 
Project? 
The SUSTAINEXT project aims to scale up and validate a first-of-its-kind concept based on the 
integration of the whole supply chain - from feedstock to end users - applying a disruptive 
circular model integrated into a dynamic biorefinery, to achieve the complete valorisation of 
the processed feedstock with a zero-waste and zero-emissions ambition  
What 
challenges does 
SUSTAINEXT 
face? 
SUSTAINEXT is intended to address challenges related to both industrial and environmental 
aspects. The former regards the large-scale production of high-added value biobased 
products obtained in an integrated, circular and sustainable way. Environmental aspects are 
key as the whole process must be zero waste and zero emissions. 
What does 
SUSTAINEXT 
do? 
SUSTAINEXT proposes the construction of a first-of-its-kind biorefinery establishing a stable 
and sustainable supply of feedstocks; creating a novel concept of a circular, sustainable and 
digital biorefinery to serve as a model the for future progress and technological advancement 
of the European sector of herbal extracts; while validating and qualifying at industrial scale 
the integration of 12 VRs that enable obtaining 46 plant-based healthy extracts to deliver 
tailormade formulations according to end-users and market needs. 
What benefits 
for climate and 
society can be 
induced by 
SUSTAINEXT? 
To demonstrate that the activities and processes initiated in the project will positively 
contribute to climate change mitigation (ZeroNet carbon emissions) and to climate change 
adaptation by enforcing a sustainable use and protection of water, by effectively reducing 
pollutant emissions - air, water, soil and noise- and protection and restoration of biodiversity 
and ecosystems, establishing an innovative concept that could be adapted and replicated in 
other EU regions. 
The communication strategy has been designed with an omnichannel approach. This means it will be open on any 
available channel that can help maximise the impact of the project. Communication actions are planned to actively 
work with digital channels and audio-visual materials. Digital channels have proved their effectiveness and relevance 
in the last decade (significantly during the pandemic) and allow to amplify the reaching of influence. For this reason, 
most of the project’s communication channels will be online. The details of SUSTAINEXT’s communication action plan 
are described in Table 2.6. 
 
Table 2.6. Details of SUSTAINEXT’s communication action plan. 
ACTION CHANNEL STARTING 
MONTH AUDIENCE PROPOSE WHO KPI 
Communication 
materials 
Online/ 
offline M1 All audiences Raise knowledge about 
the project BIO 5 materials + visual 
identity 
Project website Online M3 All audiences Build a digital presence BIO 
750 visits/ year, 3.4k 
visits total, 50 
downloads/year 
Project flyer Online 
Events M6 All audiences Raise knowledge about 
the project BIO 500 units distributed 
Social media Online M1 
Industry, 
academia, 
policymakers 
Build a digital presence BIO 500 followers, 30 
LinkedIn posts/year 
Partner’s 
websites Online M3 All audiences Build a digital presence All 4,000 visits/year 
Videos Online M15 All audiences Create social impact and 
general understanding BIO 1,000 views 
Project press 
releases Online M1 All audiences 
Attracting the attention 
of the media and its 
readers 
BIO 50 media impacts 
DYANA Doors 
Open Days Physycal M12 Local 
community 
Public awareness and 
acceptance of DYANA NAT 4 days, 100 visits 
Project local 
D&C actions Physycal M12 Local 
community 
Public awareness and 
acceptance of DYANA NAT 
4 SUSTAINEXT 
presentations in local 
key events 
 
 
 
 
 
 Page 43 of 70 
2.2.2. Exploitation plan 
During WP 6 a complete exploitation strategy will be developed for all identified KER in the proposal and newly 
developed. We detail here a preliminary commercialization strategy for main business actors within the consortium. 
 
Natac: A Full de scription of the business model and business strategy is presented as an annex in the BP . Natac 
commercializes bulk healthy ingredients using a B2B business model to companies from target markets 
(nutraceutical, food/feed, cosmetics, performance chemicals), which develop final products for end users (B2C).  
Natac Unique Selling Points (USP) after SUSTAINEXT: 
- Traceability: Close and sustainably sourced feedstocks warrantees’ full feedstock traceability and certified 
origin. 
- Quality: High quality feedstock will allow to produce final ingredients of the highest quality. 
- Cost efficiency: DYANA will maximize resource efficiency positioning Natac as cost leader. 
- Overall sustainability: SUSTAINEXT products will have a reduced carbon footprint (zero ambition) and will have 
a seal of excellence in sustainable production. 
- Production capacity: SUSTAINEXT will increase 5-fold the production capacity of Natac. 
SUSTAINEXT will deliver 46 plant-based healthy extracts and functional ingredients and Natac will employ a different 
commercialization strategy depending on their innovation and market maturity degree.  
- 10 products already commercialized by Natac  (green labelled in table 1. 1): Natac will use a penetration 
strategy to increase sales derived from geographical expansion in current (EUR, NAM) and emerging (APAC, 
EMEA, LATAM) markets. Sales will come right after the project ends. Main penetration strategy will come from 
Natac´s USP (cost, traceability, and sustainability). 
- 12 are new for Natac, but well established in the market  Natac will target current clients for these new 
products, while opening new markets for newly developed products. Time to market will be short and main 
penetration strategy will come from Natac´s USP (cost, traceability, and sustainability). 
- 12 are newly produced in Europe (currently imported from APAC) : Here the main objective will be to move 
clients towards European certified products. Time to market will be longer, as commercial force needs to 
identify potential end users and established new links.  
- 13 are totally new in the market: Most innovative products require longer time to reach the market but allow 
differentiation and higher commercial margins. End users within the consortium will act as early adopters for 
these solutions.  
 
Current market for SUSTAINEXT products is highly lucrative: (hydroxytyrosol - US$ 2 Bn & 7% CAGR19; Rosemary $260 
M & CAGR of 3.1%20; Olive leaf extract 405.25 M & CAGR of 4% 21 . 
 
 
Project support towards maximum exploitation  
 
SUSTAINEXT has received support from several entities (private companies, institutions, associations, and clusters). 
Political authorities from Extremadura have shown special commitment to the project at the highest levels. 
Organizations that have shown support for the SUSTAINEXT project are listed below. 
 
SENDER SECTOR 
Mr. Guillermo Fernández Vara. President of Extremadura. Policy makers 
Ms. Begoña García. Regional Ministry for Agriculture, Rural Development, 
Population and Territory of the Government of Extremadura Policy makers 
Ms. Patricia Valle (Mayor of Hervás) Policy makers 
Federación Española de Centros Tecnológicos (FEDIT) Non-profit private research organization 
Advanced Biofuels and Bioproducts Unit at CIEMAT Public research center 
Extremadura Avante S.L.U Public enterprise from Junta de Extremadura 
Inveready Venture Capital 
Confederación Española de Asoc. de Jóvenes Empresarios Multi-sectoral organization 
European Sustainable Phosphorus Platform NGO - Sustainability 
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis International research institute; System analysis 
Cluster ACUIPLUS, Food for Life-Spain Biovegen Clusters, platforms, Public-private partnership 
Cooperativas agro-alimentarias Agri-food sector 
CREA IT Private company; IT sector 
Universidad de Murcia Public university 
LoIs are included as annex with BIC certificates
 
19 https://www.factmr.com/report/3533/hydroxytyrosol -market#:~:text=The%20global%20hydroxytyr osol%20market%20is,around%207%25%20CAGR%20through%202031 . 
20 https://www.industryarc.com/Research/Rosemary -Extracts-Market-Research-504501 
21 https://www.technavio.com/report/olive-leaf-extract-market-industry-
analysis?utm_source=prnewswire&utm_medium=pressrelease&utm_campaign=TNV2.1_wk2_004_report_2022&utm_content=IRTNTR70244  
 
 
 Page 44 of 70 
SUSTAINEXT has developed a preliminary exploitation strategy covering the whole value chain and aligned with the objectives presented in the AWP and CBE-SRIA. Table 2-
2-4 summarized the key exploitable results (KER) from each partner, the initial exploitation strategy, each business model and USPs.  
 
Table 2.7 Preliminary exploitation strategy. 
PARTICIPANT NAME  KER INITIAL EXPLOITATION STRATEGY  INITIAL BUSINESS MODEL & UNIQUE SELLING POINTS  
NATAC New Flagship, DYANA; 46 plant-
based healthy extracts 
Commercialization of newly developed products. 
Application of DYANA in future feedstocks 
B2B commercialization of plant-based healthy extracts and functional 
ingredients: USP: cost, traceability/origin, sustainability 
INNO TRL 8 olive leaf pre-treatments. Supply of high-quality olive biomass to Natac Internal (Natac) commercialization of olive biomass.  
AGROS TRL 8 Artichoke and Pomegranate 
high quality biomass 
Commercialization of high-quality pomegranate 
and artichoke biomass. 
Commercialization of fibre 
Internal commercialization of biomass (Natac), external B2B 
commercialization of agro-industrial side streams. 
USP: Sustainably, high-quality sourced feedstock. 
TABEX 
TRL 8 validated new crops 
(rosemary, camomile, lemon 
verbena) 
Diversification of tobacco industry by cultivating 
new MAPs  
Internal commercialization of MAPs (Natac), external B2B 
commercialization for different applications (tea bags, functional 
ingredients, etc.). USP: Origin, traceability, ECO. 
INP TRL 8 validated new camomile crops  
Commercialization of camomile. Stable supply 
for product development by mother company 
(STAR) 
B2B internal sales (NATAC & STAR). External B2B sales for different 
applications (tea bags, functional ingredients, etc.) 
USP: Origin, traceability, ECO, link with STAR. 
DOP TRL 8 cardoon cultivation and 
farming 
Stable supply of cardoon for cheese coagulant. 
Additional revalorization from cardon aerial part 
commercialization 
High quality cheese for B2C market. Additional income from B2B (NATAC) 
market of cardoon aerial part. 
USP: Quality, PDO, traceability, standardization. 
IRIS TRL 8 NIR sensor for phytochemical 
and alcohol detection 
Commercialization of technology in bio-based 
industry 
B2B future sensor implementation (NATAC). External B2B sales for future 
exploitation of developed sensors in biobased sector.  
USP: Disruptive first of its kind technology  
CTAEX New agricultural practices. Publications. Licenses. New research projects.  Know how/patent licensing 
ECO Know how in LCA/LCC/SLCA in a 
complex environment (DYANA) 
Application of developed know how in new 
industrial sectors 
B2B consultancy services. 
USP: Expertise in cascade dynamic biorefining models. 
ENEL IT/ES TRL 8 MAPs agrivoltaics Improvement of soil performance. Hiring soi for 
MAPs cultivation.  
B2B agreements with farmers and cooperatives to exploit soil in 
agrivioltaics. USP: Territorial engagement, soil availability, ready-to-market 
cultivation technology. 
ARRAM Know how on first-of-its-kind 
biorefinery (DYANA)  
Application of developed know how in future 
industrial projects 
B2B Consultancy services. USP: Territorial engagement, know how in 
complex biorefining projects. 
STAR/ACEL/MIAVIT 
NUT/MBL/ BIOM 
Bioactivity results of tested 
products. Ready to market products. 
Commercialization of newly developed 
formulations and final products 
B2B and B2C product commercialization. USP: Product access, traceability, 
origin, sustainability of the supply chain, cost, product supported 
performance and efficacy. 
UNITO New knowledge and know how in 
product testing in PET applications  Publications. Licenses. New research projects Know how/patent licensing 
FUNCYT Examples of impacts derived form 
SUSTAINEXT 
Industrial and social engagement towards 
biobased industry opportunities. N/A 
BIOPLAT Examples of impacts derived form 
SUSTAINEXT 
Biobased industry and social engagement 
towards biobased industry opportunities. N/A 
 
 
 Page 45 of 70 
2.2.3. Management of intellectual property 
 
The IPR management will be addressed in WP6. The authority responsible for making decisions regarding the legal 
protection and commercialisation of the IP shall remain with the owner of the created IP . All partners will sign a 
Consortium Agreement (CA) that will include how the intellectual property rights (IPR) will be regulated.  A 
comprehensive IPR strategy will be drawn up and accepted by the partners of the consortium under the supervision 
of IPP with José Carlos Quintela (Natac) as the project’s Innovation Manager. 
IP an essential component for ensuring the correct technology transfer without infringing on IP rights (IPR). Table 2.8 
depicts a description of the background IP associated with each part ner along with the potential of exploitable 
results, the IP type and the strategy for IP protection currently estimated. A commonly accepted course of action will 
be performed for the management of knowledge (approval and publication of document versions) following the 
IAPED methodology: Identify–Assess–Protect–Exploit-Disseminate (figure 2.4).  
 
Figure 2.4 IAPED methodology. 
 
Table 2.8 Generation of IP and IP protection strategies 
PARTNER Background in use Potential exploitable 
results. IP type Strategy for IP 
protection 
 
 
NATAC/INNO 
 
TRL-6 of selected 
extraction and 
purification 
methodologies to be 
scaled within the project. 
New design of multi-
valorisation routes, 
including main and side 
stream bioproducts. 
DYANA 
Production process 
& product  
Secret know-how 
and/or IP protection  
TRL 6 olive leaves pre-
treatments 
Optimized industrial scale 
processes 
Production process 
& product  
Secret know-how 
and/or IP protection  
AGROS 
Collection, transport and 
use of pomegranate and 
artichoke biomass  
Pre-treatments to 
modulate the Suitability 
Parameters 
Methodology & 
knowledge  
Copyrights 
Secret know-how  
TABEX 
ENEL 
Cultivation of MAPs 
agrivoltaics 
Optimized and scaled 
cultivation procedures 
Methodology & 
knowledge  
Copyrights 
Secret know-how  
 
DOP 
Cardoon cultivation and 
recollection.  
Optimized and scaled 
cultivation procedures 
Methodology & 
knowledge  
Copyrights 
Secret know-how 
CTAEX MAPs cultivation in 
Extremadura 
Optimized and scaled 
cultivation procedures 
Methodology & 
knowledge  
Patents and licensing 
of IPR  
UNITO Know how in feed 
functional testing 
Application of new 
ingredients in pet health 
Methodology and 
applications 
Patents. Licensing of 
IPR to industrial users 
IRIS Sensor technology  New sensors for bioactive 
compound and ethanol  
New 
products/software 
Secret know-how 
and/or IP protection 
STAR ACEL, NUT 
BIOM, MIAVIT, 
MBL, AGROS,  
Food ingredient/End 
product/formulation 
development 
New formulation with 
improved performance for 
specific market 
Production process 
and product 
Secret know-how 
and/or IP protection 
 
A technology watch system will be implemented since the beginning of the project to its respective completion to 
monitor any new data that can affect the Freedom To Operate (FTO) or can alter the IP protection strategy (Task 
6.4). The monitoring system will include the following search engines: general internet search (google), Patent Data 
Bases (WIPO, Espacenet, Google patents), Papers database (Web Of Knowledge, Science Direct, Google Scholar, etc.); 
Social Networks; and miscellaneous such as EFSA, EMA, FDA, etc. The Innovation Manager, José Carlos Quintela from 
NATAC will coordinate these efforts, thus ensuring the freedom to operate remains unchanged during the project. 
 
 
 
Knowledge (GENERATION) 
·Research groups (RTOs) and companies (SMEs) 
generate and identify new knowledge (1) 
·A thorough worldwide patent search to identify 
any prior disclosures, complementary IPR or  
other relevant  data, assessing novelty and 
patentability (2) 
 
Knowledge (APPLICATION) 
·Evaluation of the knowledge or technology both 
within the consortium and by key opinion leaders . 
Drafting and filing of a robust patent application to 
establish a priority date (3) 
·In case the result s obtained are not patentable, 
they will be disseminated in different media (fairs, 
congresses, clients, publications...) (4) 
 
 
Knowledge (PROFITABILITY) 
·The exploitable results have been protected (IP) 
and can be transferred to the socio -economic 
sectors interested in their exploitation (5) 
·As soon as project results are approved for 
dissemination can be published in selected 
channels (Promotional events, Trade fair/shows, 
Publications) (6) 
 
 
 
 Page 46 of 70 
2.3. Summary: key element of the impact section 
 
SPECIFIC NEEDS  EXPECTED RESULTS E&D&C MEASURES 
- Europe transition to green carbon neutral in 
2050 (Circular economy and the Zero pollution). 
- Plant-based sector is stuck in processes from the 
20th century. Linear, mono-product, analogical. 
- Tobacco Industry in Extremadura seeks for new 
alternatives to tobacco cultivation. 
- European agro-industrial underused biomass 
represents (956 Mton). Opportunity for 
valorisation.  
- Current solar plants represent an opportunity 
for agrivoltaics. 
- General society demand towards carbon neutral 
products. 
- Successful large-scale validation of a smart 
biorefinery (zero waste Net Zero emissions) 
- Dynamic Analytic Algorithm DYANA 
- Upscaled farming practices for MAPs cultivation 
- Upscaled farming practices for MAPs agrivoltaics 
cultivation 
- Pre-treatments to increase agro-industrial 
biomass and PAMs feedstocks quality 
- 46 plant-based healthy extracts and functional 
ingredients 
- Circularity: agro-industrial side-streams 
upcycling, fertilizer production 
- Real time sensors monitoring Th OH y 
compounds. 
Exploitation: 
- Main KER and business models identified for each partner. 
- Opportunity to B2B commercialization of plant-based 
healthy ingredients in a $59.4 billion market. 
- Exploitation strategy and USP defined. 
 
D&C 
- Full multi-actor approach implementation to co-create 
with stakeholders and to increase awareness. 
- Local actions to foster public awareness and acceptance of 
DYANA in the region (Open Doors Days and presentation 
in local events). 
- Actions reaching 25,000 pax from target groups 
TARGET GROUPS OUTCOMES IMPACTS 
- >20 olive, artichoke and pomegranate producers 
- 1,300 farmers   
- 4,000 inhabitants in Hervas town 
- Plant based industry 500 companies 
- General society from high quality healthy 
ingredients and end products sustainably 
produced and carbon neutral. 
- Policy makers 
- End users within the consortium 
- Industry will use plant-based healthy extracts 
- 100 M of direct turnover in flagship 
- New flagship will be NetZero. All energy used 
will be green  
- 10,000 tonnes of agro-industrial side streams 
will be upcycled. 
- 1,503,142 Kg of CO2 will be sequestrated by 
crops 
-  1,500 direct green jobs  
- New lucrative and sustainable alternative for 
tobacco industry 
- Public awareness and acceptance of bio-based 
solutions.  
Scientific  
- New biorefining smart and digital concept and dynamic 
analysis algorithm 
- Feedstock pre-treatments 
Economic:  
- 6 new biobased feedstocks 
- Replicable model 
- 700 M€ of added value. 
Societal 
- 5,000 job creation 
- Reduction of GHG and alignment with 2050 EU aim. 
- Reduction of rural depopulation (Extremadura, etc.) 
- Increasing acceptance to biobased solutions  
 
 
 
 
 
 Page 47 of 70 
3. QUALITY AND EFFICIENCY OF THE IMPLEMENT A TION 
 
3.1. Work plan and resources  
3.1.1. Overall structure of the work plan 
SUSTAINEXT will be based on a 54-month Work Plan, divided into 7 Work Packages (WPs), which have been conceived 
to ensure a correct implementation while maintaining time-efficiency. The main aim of the project is to upscale and 
establish 12 circular, multi-product, cascaded valorisation routes to fully valorise 6 sustainably -sourced feedstocks, 
3 agro-industrial by-products and 3 MAPs, and deliver  46 plant-based healthy extracts and functional ingredients, 
with zero-waste and zero-emissions ambition. Main activities include: upscaling of crop cultivation & pre-treatments 
to set up a stable , sustainable and smart supply chain (WP1), designing and constructing a circular, multi-valorisation 
route, digital biorefinery ( WP2), upscaling the processes in each VR to TRL -8 and interlacing the production in a 
cascade manner to achieve maximum valorisation and zero-waste (WP3), validate the developed bio-based products 
and secure their uptake in high value-added target markets (WP4), assess the regulatory compliance and the whole 
value chain impacts and ensure zero -environmental impact and carbon neutrality ( WP5), develop a correct 
dissemination and communication action plan including a multi -actor approach ( WP6) and manage the overall 
project (WP7). 
3.1.2. Gantt & Pert 
 
Figure 3.1 SUSTAINEXT Gantt. 
 
 
Figure 3.2 SUSTAINEXT pert. 
 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 # 21 # # # # # # # # # 31 # # # # # # # # # 41 # # # # # # # # # 51 # # #
WP1 FEEDSTOCK: Upscale of crops, agrovoltaics, biomass & pretreatments 
T1.1 Agrovoltaics crops
T1.2 MAPs cultivation in disused tobacco fields 
T1.3 Agroindusrial biomass and pre-treatments
WP2 BIORREFINERY DESIGN & CONSTRUCTION: Towards circularity & digitalization
T2.1 New polyphenol plant: integrating technologies 
T2.2 Triterpenic acid isolation plant 
T2.3 Digitalization for monitoring manufacturing processes 
T2.4 Digitization for a sustainable DYANA with zero-emission ambition 
WP3 SAMBIO BIORREFINERY: Achieving maximum value & zero waste
T3.1 Achieving maximum value & zero waste from olive feedstocks. VR 1 to 4
T3.2 Achieving maximum value & zero waste from artichoke feedstocks. VR 5 to 7
T3.3 Achieving maximum value & zero waste from pomegranate. VR 8
T3.4 Achieving maximum value & zero waste from rosemary. VR 9-10
T3.5 Achieving maximum value & zero waste from lemon verbena. VR 11
T3.6 Achieving maximum value & zero waste from chamomile. VR 12
T3.7 Demostrating the replicability of DYANA Biorefinery 
WP4 PRODUCT APPLICATIONS: High value applications in the global market
T4.1 Food supplement market
T4.2 Food ingredients
T4.3 Pet market: dogs and cats
T4.4 Farm animals market
T4.5 Bio-based fertilizers
T4.6 Cosmetics products
WP5 TOWARDS ZERO ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT AND REGULARY COMPLIANCE
T5.1 Life Cycle Cost Assessment (LCCA) 
T5.2 Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) 
T5.3 Social Life Cycle Assessment
T5.4 Circularity assessment 
T5,5 Regulatory, legal and beyond legal limitations.
WP6 D&C & EXPLOITATION: Fostering policy makers, stakeholders and general public awareness 
for biobased opportunities
T6.1 Dissemination and communication strategy 
T6.2 Liaison and networking activities with relevant actors…
T6.3 Multi-actor approach to enhance public awareness …
T6.4 Paving the way towards exploitation
WP7 PROJECT MANAGEMENT - Ensuring the accomplishments of objectives and expected 
impacts
T7.1 Project consortium management 
T7.2 Technical, financial and risk management 
T7.3 Flaghsip construction management 

 
 
 Page 48 of 70 
3.1.3. List of WPs (3.1a) 
Table 3.1a. List of work packages 
WP Work Package Title Lead 
Part. No 
Lead Participant 
Short Name 
Person-
Months 
Start 
Month 
End 
month 
1 FEEDSTOCK: Upscale of crops, agrivoltaics, biomass & pre-
treatments 5 CTAEX 268 M1 M51 
2 BIORREFINERY DESIGN & CONSTRUCTION: Towards circularity 
& digitalization 10 ARRAM 439 M2 M54 
3 DYANA BIORREFINERY: Achieving maximum value & zero waste  1 NATAC 489 M18 M52 
4 PRODUCT APPLICATIONS: High value applications in the global 
market 15 BIOM 320 M3 M54 
5 TOWARDS ZERO ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT AND REGULATORY 
COMPLIANCE. 6 ECO 165 M8 M54 
6 D&C & EXPLOITATION: Fostering policy makers, stakeholders, 
and general public awareness for biobased opportunities.    7 BIOPLAT 179 M1 M54 
7 PROJECT MANAGEMENT - Ensuring the accomplishments of 
objectives and expected impacts 1 NATAC 240 M1 M54 
 
3.1.4. Detailed work description of work packages (3.1b) 
WP1 FEEDSTOCK: Upscale of crops, agrivoltaics, biomass & pre-treatments   
OBJECTIVES: 
- To scale, optimize and validate at TRL 8 rosemary crops in agrivoltaics, and rosemary, lemon verbena and 
camomile crops cultivation at a hectare scale in disused tobacco fields. 
- To demonstrate at TRL 8 the relevance of applying pre -treatments on the feedstocks to modulate the FSI and 
their impact in the value chain.   
- To consolidate a close collaboration link  with the agri-food industry to establish a solid and sustainable supply 
chain for the upcycling of agro-industrial side streams. 
- To establish a stable and sustainable supply of the aerial part of cardoon from DOP ‘Torta del Casar’, contributing 
to protect the value of local ‘Denomination of Origin’ products. 
DESCRIPTION OF WORK  
In SUSTAINEXT, six feedstocks will be used: three agro-industrial biomasses and three sustainably cultivated plants. 
Task 1.1. Agrivoltaics crops (M3-M51); LEADER: ENEL IT, ENEL ES, CTAEX, NATAC).  
CTAEX will produce rosemary seedlings using fulvic acids obtained from VR-4 (NATAC, M6) to promote optimal growth 
in the first stages. Rosemary crops will be cultivated in a photovoltaic plant (monofacial panels wi th trackers) of 
around 10 Ha located in Extremadura, owned by ENEL. Biomass production (45 MT of dry biomass), quality of the 
plant, and others agronomic factors will be monitored across the project. Rosemary samples will be sent to NATAC 
every 6 months to monitor their FSI. Pre-treatments of 60-70ºC for 45 min will be carried out to modulate the FSI for 
VR-9 and VR-10. A database will be built up with the measurements related to rosemary growth (plant height, leaf 
humidity, etc.), soil conditions (humidity , temperature and conductivity), environmental parameters (temperature 
and humidity), radiation (direct, indirect and reflected) and the synergy and/or the potential interference of the crop 
growth on the energy production of the photovoltaic plant. A network of agricultural and energy performance sensors 
will be installed to collect all the data measurements and send all the information in real time. This cultivation will be 
carried out without an irrigation system for plant growth, and without using pollu ting chemical products such as 
fungicides or herbicides, aiming to meet the ecological criteria. When necessary, pre-treatments to tune the FSI will 
be carried out in the TABEX tobacco dryers. Results of this task will be provided in D1.1 and D1.2. 
ENEL will send 3 batches of 2 MT to NATAC (M24), and 3 batches of 2 MT(M42).  
Task 1.2. MAPs cultivation in disused tobacco fields (M2-M51; LEADER: TABEX, CTAEX, INP, STAR, NATAC).  
Subtask 1.2.1.- Camomile. This crop will be managed by INP, based on the agronomic techniques previously developed 
by the company to be adapt the growth of the camomile in tobacco lands and scale up these crops in the region. It 
will be cultivated in two different locations, for a total area of 12 Ha.  CTAEX will collect and analyse a soil sample to 
adjust the agronomical technics. Organic agriculture technics will be preferred to conventional ones.  An irrigation 
system could be necessary depending on the weather conditions. The camomile field will be harvested mechanically 
by INP, with an estimated yield of 5000 kg/ha in fresh material and 1000 kg/ha in dry material. The crop will be 
monitored by sensors (soil and environmental) and satellite images throughout the crop cycle. Camomile samples will 
 
 
 Page 49 of 70 
be sent to Natac every 6 months to monitor their FSI. A bio-based fertilizer obtained in WP4 (Task 4.5) will be applied 
as organic fertilizer (M24, BIOM). 0.5 Ha trials will be conducted to assess the efficacy of this fertilizer, evaluating 
different doses and moments of application. Based on these results, the fertilizer with the best performance from 
WP4 will be applied in the whole crop area. INP will send 3 batches of 2 MT to NATAC (M24) and 3 batches of 2 MT 
(M46) for VR-12. Results of this task will be provided in D1.3. 
Subtask 1.2.2.- Rosemary. CTAEX will produce the rosemary seedlings using fulvic acids obtained from VR-4 (NATAC, 
M6) to promote optimal growth in the first stages. CTAEX will supply the plant material and will collect and analyse a 
soil sample to adjust the agronomical technics. T ABEX will be in charge of soil preparation, fertilizer application, 
irrigation, and the other maintenance technics, according to indications from CTAEX. Planting density will be 
established according to the machinery available to guarantee the complete mec hanization of crop recollection. 
Weed control will be carried out mechanically, and organic fertilizers will be used to supply the nutritional needs of 
the crop. Low irrigation will be installed to increase crop yield. According to previous data, this will  modify the FSI 
compared to rosemary cultivated in dry land (subtask 1.2.1). The harvest of the plant material will be done 
mechanically using an adapted harvester. A total area of 6Ha will be cultivated, with an estimated yield of 1800 kg/Ha 
(dry biomass) during the first year. The yield is estimated to increase until 5000 kg/Ha for the second year and 8500 
kg/Ha for the third year. Rosemary samples will be sent to NATAC every 6 months to monitor their FSI for VR -9 and 
10. The crop will be monitored by sensors (soil and environmental) and satellite images throughout its cycle. 
A bio-based fertilizer obtained in WP4 (Task 4.6) will be applied as organic fertilizer to this crop (M24, BIOM). 0.5 Ha 
trials will be conducted to assess the efficacy of this fertilizer, evaluating different doses and moments of application. 
When necessary, p re-treatments to tune the FSI will be applied: rosemary plants will be thermically treated with 
temperatures of 60-70ºC during 45 min in the TABEX tobacco dryers.  TABEX will send 3 batches of 2 MT to NATAC 
(M24), 3 batches of 2 MT for VR-9 and VR-10 (M42). Results of this task will be provided in D1.4. 
Subtask 2.3.- Lemon verbena. CTAEX will supply the plant material and will collect and analyse a soil sample to adjust 
the agronomical techniques. TABEX will oversee soil preparation, fertilizer application, irrigation, and other 
maintenance techniques, according to indications from CTAEX.  Following the same procedure as describe d for 
rosemary cultivation, a total area of 5Ha will be cultivated, with an estimated fresh yield of 8000 kg/Ha. Lemon 
verbena samples will be sent to NATAC every 6 months to monitor their FSI.  Collected plant material will be 
conditioned and stabilized by drying to obtain the most suitable feedstock for VR-11. TABEX will send 3 batches of 2 
MT to NATAC (M24), 3 batches of 2 MT for VR-11 (M43). Results of this task will be provided in D1.5. 
Task 1.3. Agro-industrial biomasses and pre-treatments (M2-M48; LEADER: AGROS, INNO, DOP, CTAEX, NATAC,).  
Subtask 1.3.1.- Olive: leaves, fruit skin and OMWW. INNO will collect300 MT of olive leaves, generated as a side stream 
from the olive oil industry. It will include leaves from different ol ive varieties as Manzanilla Cacereña (from 
Extremadura) and Picual or Hojiblanca (from Cordoba and Seville). Olive leaf samples will be sent to NATAC every 6 
months to monitor their FSI. These leaves will be dried in the sun during several days. Different pre-treatments will 
be applied in order to modulate their FSI for each VR: i) Fresh olive leaves will be thermically pre -treated with 
temperatures of 100 -120ºC during 10 -20 min for VR -1; ii) Olive leaves will be stored and maturated in big piles 
producing a natural degradation, turned in the most suitable feedstock for VR -2; iii) INNO will obtain the olive fruit 
skin by applying a cleaning pre-treatment that adequately separates the olive skin from the pits resulting in a better 
conditioned feedstock for VR-3, pits will be sent to the biomass boiler for testing; iv) INNO will manage the OMWW 
generated in the olive industry. Batches of 1000 Hectoliters  of OMWW will be matured in controlled conditions 
followed by a concentration process and microfiltration steps, obtaining a concentrated final product to be used in 
VR4. INNO will send 3 batches of 5 MT (M24), 3 batches of 20MT/batch (M38) for VR -1. For VR-2, INNO will send 3 
batches of 5 MT (M36), 3 batches of 20MT/batch (M44).   For VR-3, INNO will send 3 batches of 5 MT of olive skin 
(M36) and 3 batches of 6 MT(M44) and 350 MT pits). INNO will send 3 batches of 25 MT of OMWW to NATAC (M18), 
3 batches of 25MT/batch (M28) for VR-4. Results of this task will be provided in D1.6. 
Subtask 1.3.2.- Artichoke: aerial part and bracts.  AGROS will collect  side streams from the artichoke food industry 
(leaves and bracts) and stabilize them. This biomass will be pre -treated with steam blanching during 10 min, 
converting it in a feedstock for VR-6. Similarly, AGROS will collect the rest of the aerial part of the artichoke plant that 
is abandoned in the fields at the end of the harvest and pre -treat and stabilize the pla nt material to be used as 
feedstock for VR -5. Artichoke samples will be sent to NATAC every 6 months to monitor their FSI. They will be 
stabilized in a new drying unit specifically designed and developed for this project by AGROS. AGROS will send 2MT 
feedstock to Natac (M18), 3 batches of 4 MT (M36) for VR-5. AGROS will send 3 batches of 4MT feedstock (M24), 3 
batches of 10 MT (M36) for VR-6.  Results of this task will be provided in D1.7 
 
 
 Page 50 of 70 
Subtask 1.3.3- Pomegranate. AGROS will collect  pomegranate industry side streams (peel residues). Pomegranate 
peels will be conditioned and stabilized by drying (using the same technology as described for artichoke) to obtain 
the most suitable feedstock for VR-8. Peel samples will be sent to NATAC every 6 months to monitor their FSI. AGROS 
will send 3 batches of 4MT feedstock to NATAC (M18), 3 batches of 8 MT (M36) for VR-8. Results of this task will be 
provided in D1.7. 
Subtask 1.3.4. - Cardoon. Cardoon crops will be managed by DOP, according to indications from CTAEX. Optimal 
agronomical practices will be performed for preparing the soil, applying the fertilizers, maintaining the crops, and 
harvesting the plant material. DOP will collect the rest of the aerial part of the cardoon plant resulting once the flower 
is harvested for use as a coagulant in cheese factories and send it to NATAC’s facilities. A mechanical harvester will 
be used to obtain a higher biomass yield. Cardoon will be cultivated as organic crop, so only organic fertilizers and 
pesticides will be used. A drip irrigation system will be implemented to supply water in critical moments throughout 
the crop’s cycle. A total area of 18Ha will be cultivated, with an estimated yield of 2400 0kg/Ha. CTAEX will monitor 
these crops by sensors (soil and environmental) and satellite images. The cardoon aerial part will be conditioned and 
stabilized by drying to obtain the most suitable feedstock for VR -7. Cardoon samples will be sent to NATAC every 6 
months to monitor their FSI. DOP will send 3 batches of 0,5 MT to NATAC (M18), 3 of 1 MT (M40) for VR-7. Results of 
this task will be provided in D1.8.  
WP1 MILESTONE 2:  Three MAPs crops initiated (rosemary, camomile and lemon verbena (M9). MILESTONE 6:176 
Tonnes of all 6 pre -treated feedstocks available for TRL 7 validation (M24); MILESTONE 10: 318 Tonnes of all 6 pre -
treated feedstocks available for TRL 8 validation (M46). 
WP2 BIOREFINERY DESIGN & CONSTRUCTION: Towards circularity & digitalization 
OBJECTIVES:  
- To design, construct and validate the three new technological units that will be integrated with the ones 
currently at place in the new plant for extraction and purification of polyphenols  
- To design, construct and validate a new unit for extraction and isolation of terpenoids 
- To design, construct and validate a real time monitorization system for polyphenols and alcohol grade  
- To design, construct and validate a complete digitalization system for the control of total emissions to permit 
the advancement towards the zero-emissions objective  
Task 2.1. New polyphenol plant: integrating technologies from linear to cascade (M2-M26; LEADER: Natac, ARRAM).   
Subtask 2.1.1. Civil work : i) basic design, where all the necessary requirements of the civil work will be designed to 
accommodate the different processes that will be implemented in this zone (subtask 2.1.2). The work in this subtask 
will include representation of staff flows, materials, products, side streams, etc., and space allocation; block and flow 
diagrams; mass balances of products and side streams; inputs for correct dimensioning. ii) detailed design of the civil 
work: every block and every flow will be developed according to the characteristics of each one of the processes; iii) 
construction and installations: to accommodate the new equipment and processes; iv) qualification of the civil work: 
verifying the performance and correct functioning of everything as was designed and constructed.  
Subtask 2.1.2.- Processing plant: This subtask will address the design and construction of the following technologies: 
desolventisation unit; micronization extraction unit; polyphenol purification unit and improvements towards zero -
emissions in the drying systems and clean rooms, with the following stages: i) basic design, flow and process diagrams 
to evaluate the necessities of the equipment, setting  the dimensions and characteristics of each system, necessary 
installations and spaces of each civil work, with a  processing capacity of 5,000 MT extracts/year;  ii) detailed design 
of the different technologies : specify the characteristics of each new equipment piece and each process and their 
integration to work in cascade. This design will be carried out jointly with external collaborators with whom NATAC 
has worked successfully in the construction of the current plant; iii) construction and installations: external supplier; 
iv) equipment qualification: verifying the performance and correct functioning of everything as was designed and 
constructed (WP3, phase 1).  
Subtask 2.1.3. - Auxiliary installations : adjustments for the new requirements of power, energy, heat, cold, fire 
protection system, sanitation, etc. Therefore, this subtask will be divided in the same stages as before: i) basic design, 
ii) detailed design of the auxiliar installations iii) construction and installations; iv) equipment qualification.  
Results of this task will be provided in D2.1 to D2.3 
MILESTONES 1: Earthwork Licensing ready (M4); MILESTONE 4: Polyphenol unit ready to start up (M24) 
Task 2.2. Terpenoid isolation plant (M6-M36; LEADER: ARRAM, NATAC).  This task includes the construction of a new 
production plant from zero in a 10.000 m2 parcel annexed to the current production facility (Fig 1.6). This plant will 
be dedicated to the extraction and purification of terpenoid compounds, and other phytochemicals. 
 
 
 Page 51 of 70 
Subtask 2.2.1. Civil work : Similar to the stages described in subtask 2.1.1, the work will include: i) basic design, ii) 
detailed design  of the civil work ; iii) construction and installations : to accommodate the new equipment and 
processes; iv) qualification of the civil work: verifying the performance and correct functioning of everything as was 
designed and constructed.  
Subtask 2.2.2.- Processing plant: This subtask will involve the design and construction of a new unit that includes all 
the processing stages, from plant preparation, to extraction, desolventisation, concentration, differential solubility 
purification, crystallization and drying of the end -product with processing capacity of 10,000 MT extracts/year. Just 
like in task 2.1, 4 stages will be included: i)  basic design, ii) detailed design of the different equipments and their 
integration to work in cascade;  iii) construction and installations ; iv) equipment qualification : to verify the 
performance and correct functioning of everything as it was designed and constructed. (see WP3, phase 1). 
Subtask 2.2.3. - Auxiliary installations : adjustments for the new requirements of power, energy, heat, cold,  fire 
protection system, sanitation, etc. Therefore, this subtask will be divided in the same stages as before: i) basic design, 
ii) detailed design of the auxiliar installations; iii) construction and installations; iv) equipment qualification. Results of 
this task will be provided in D2.4 to D2.6 
MILESTONE 5: Triterpenoid unit ready to start up (M36);  MILESTONE 7: Flagship design and construction complies 
with zero emissions and pollution ambition (M40) 
Task 2.3. Digitalization for monitoring manufacturing processes (M2-M54; LEADER: IRIS, NATAC).  
Subtask 2.3.1.- User requirements and specifications for monitoring, controlling and Digital tools design. In association 
with the plant operator partners, IRIS will identify the monitoring needs and the critical process parameters (CCP) 
impacting critical quality attributes (CQA) and in-process sustainability. The requirements of all the involved processes 
will be analysed. Monitoring targets are: quantification of polyphenols and quantification of ethanol content in 
concentrated liquid extraction phase.   
Task.2.3.2: Development of real-time monitoring system including Process Analytical Technology (PAT) tools . Based 
on the information generated in WP3, IRIS will collect reference samples from the process operators (NATAC) and will 
choose the most suitable technology (among NIR, Hyperspectral imaging, etc.) to o btain the required information. 
Chemometric approaches will be used for data-mining and predictive models for plant control will be developed. The 
data collected will be processed with analytics and machine learning algorithms in order to find descriptive patterns 
of the system behaviour based on reference values from the laboratory, as well as identifying malfunctions, losses, 
or other parameters that may allow a more optimal process control. IRIS will design, adapt and test the new sensors 
at laboratory scale and will design the scale up, integration, and the associated control system. This control system 
will be formed by platform integrating sensor measurements (both at hardware and software levels). A digital 
platform will be developed by IRIS for hosti ng several data analysis tools oriented towards the data elaboration of 
PAT and other instrumentation signals obtained from the industrial production line. Specifications gathered will be 
distributed among the three foreseen releases (alpha, beta and final). An edge computing infrastructure for real-time 
assessment of monitoring signals and application of PAT models, as well as data treatment strategies, will be available 
for the user at industrial sites. Specific visualization dashboards and interfaces ori ented to guide users into the 
evaluation of data to speed up and ameliorate the process monitoring will be included. A cloud infrastructure will 
allow further data treatment, analysis and evaluation by means of a database infrastructure and intuitive processing 
tools. 
Subtask 2.3.3: Integration of sensing technologies, data gathering and validation under industrial conditions . The 
installation of new monitoring technologies and plant control platform will take place, including adaptation of sensors 
to the processes, the programming of the control platform (with back-end, front-end and UI) and the hardware and 
IT requirements t o operate the system. Initial verifications and simulations of the chemometric and data mining 
models developed in previous tasks will be carried out. After development and prior to installation, validation tests 
will be carried out and will result in simplified operations of the processes to adjust and test the first versions of the 
monitoring system. IRIS will be in charge of the monitoring systems validation through testing in laboratory conditions 
and at the process operator facilities. The validations at the process operator will allow for sufficient data to confirm 
the model suitability and redefine it if needed. Moreover, IRIS staff will provide the corresponding training to plant 
operators in the use and functioning of the process monitoring system i n order to understand the data and take 
decisions based on the data outputs. Results of this task will be provided in D2.7 
Task 2.4. Digitization for a sustainable DYANA with zero-emission ambition (M2-M52; LEADER: NATAC, ARRAM, IRIS).  
Subtask 2.4.1:  Data analytics and data management tool of the DYANA Flagship : This subtask will include the 
complete integration of the three main software systems that will be implemented in the biorefinery. A SCADA system 
that collects data about manufacturing variables in each machine (power, gas and water consumptions, timing, etc.), 
 
 
 Page 52 of 70 
getting traceability for each product/batch. ERP NAVISION, that drives the manufacturing processes, generating the 
production orders and managing the required consumptions of raw material and generating the finished product 
stock; as well as the registration of processing times for each product/batch. LIMS (Laboratory Information 
Management System), that manages the creation of products/specifications, samples collection, samples analysis and 
release/rejection of the different batches. The three systems will be fully integrated (batch codes generated by 
Navision will be transferred to SCADA and LIMS, and the result data will be transferred back) to get the full traceability 
of each product/batch inside the manufacturing process. 
Subtask 2.4.2.- Integrated monitoring and reporting systems on effective reduction of pollutant emissions : Sensors 
will be installed to monitor and control emissions (water, air and noise) and will be integrated in the system SCADA 
to provide real-time measurements of the generates emissions. A reporting layer will be created using the reporting 
tool Microsoft PowerBI to monitor globally the factory performance at an environmental point of view.  
Subtask 2.4.3.- Dynamic analysis algorithm: Dynamic Analysis allots the most resource efficient manner of processing 
the biomass within the same VR. An algorithm will be developed to determine the most efficient distribution of each 
of the downstream products. The algorithm will be fed with all relevant production parameters from previous 
processing operations in each VR; pollutant emissions monitorization data, power consumption, customers’ forecasts, 
existing market demand), so the route can be adjusted dynamically to determine the optimum conditions for the 
valorization route. Initially, the data input in the algorithm will be data obtained in Phase 2 in each one the valorisation 
routes in WP3. Later on, the algorithm will consider all the previous input and output data from the past productions 
to propose a new improved route. MILESTONE 8: DYANA dynamic analysis algorithm first prototype developed and 
running. (M42) 
Subtask 2.4.4.- Predictive maintenance & plant engineering: The integration of the three software systems will allow 
a maintenance option to be installed to suggest the most adequate maintenance of the equipment: scheduling 
planned maintenance tasks of all the equipment involved in the biorefinery and proposing new tasks based on the 
data output provided by the SCADA system.   
Subtask 2.4.5.- Digital solutions for providing product information, allow traceability, assessment of sustainability and 
better communication of product information : An accessible extranet portal will be created by NATAC to provide 
information to customers and stakeholders about traceability, specifications, and any other relevant parameters for 
a specific product/batch. This portal wi ll be accessed by user/password, and apart from information related to the 
products, it will also provide other relevant information about our manufacturing processes and environmental 
impact assessments, giving transparency and full traceability.  
Results of this task will be provided in D2.8  
WP3 DYANA BIORREFINERY: Achieving maximum value & zero waste 
OBJECTIVES: 
- To Scale-up the processes included in the valorisation routes of each feedstock: olive, artichoke, pomegranate 
peel, rosemary, lemon verbena and camomile, employing extraction techniques and fractionation/isolation 
technologies to TRL-7 and TRL-8 
- To interlace the processes to assemble the cascade-based production scheme for each feedstock  
- To optimize the valorisation routes with the goal to maximize the production of both the mainstream and side 
stream bioproducts according to the FSI 
- To designate the most appropriate use of the exhausted biomass for each feedstock 
- To p erform 3 proofs of concept with different types of feedstocks that demonstrate the replicability of the 
DYANA Biorefinery 
DESCRIPTION OF WORK  
The tasks corresponding to WP3 are aimed at successfully implementing each of the 12 VR defined in the SUSTAINEXT 
project in the DYANA biorefinery (task 3.1 to 3.6). The work outline to be followed is detailed here below: 
Phase 1: Obtaining prototypes of e very product described in each VR respectively in operational environment (TRL  
7):  The objective of this phase is to scale-up all processes for obtaining each and every one of the products that can 
be derived from a determined VR to TRL 7; and adapt these processes to the new industrial plant. To achieve this, the 
work will initially start with the objective of  obtaining each of the products individually. After all produ cts of all VRs 
are obtained, the assembly of the cascades will commence, to interlace the processes and establish the conditions of 
cascaded production of various products in a determined VR. The completion of this stage will facilitate scaling -up 
the proc esses in industrial conditions and permit optimization of the conditions for successfully obtaining each 
ingredient in the posterior cascade-based operations at TRL 8. This phase will include working with 3 batches of every 
 
 
 Page 53 of 70 
feedstock relevant to each VR, i n such conditions that each batch will have a different FSI in order to provide high 
robustness in the developed processes. Once the optimal work parameters for obtaining each one of the products in 
a cascade manner is established and all the processes are  adapted to the equipment installed in the new plant, the 
work will pass to Phase 2.   
Phase 2: Final assembly of the processes in a unique, dynamic flow for manufacturing all the products in a VR and 
attaining complete qualification of the system (TRL  8):  Phase 2 will be carried out with 3 batches of each feedstock 
with different FSIs. The work contemplated in this phase will be performed in 4 individual stages:  
a) Dynamic analysis: An individual dynamic analysis, as explained in Table 2.2 (Impact section), will be conducted for 
each batch of the feedstocks using the data obtained in Phase 1 (TRL 7). The dynamic analysis will calculate the energy 
efficiency, environmental impact and yield of each product that can be obtained in the respective VR bas ed on the 
FSI of the specific feedstock batch. The goal of the analysis is to assign the best processing allotment to various 
products according to the quality of the feedstock and cost -effectiveness of the process. As a principle, a higher FSI 
value should allow reaching more advanced processing stages in the VR and obtain more refined products.  
b) Complete qualification of the system: In the second stage, each batch of feedstock will be processed in a cascaded 
manner to obtain all the products contemplat ed in its respective VR. The processing steps will include: extraction, 
concentration, purification, sterilization, drying and conditioning, as described in Fig 1.8. If the processing of a specific 
batch results in significant variations from the ones pred icted, the experiments will be repeated with a 4 th batch to 
study the cause of these deviations. All the variables relevant to each VR, including analytical and processing 
parameters, emissions, waste (if any), environmental impacts, etc., will be processed in subtask 2.4.3 to develop the 
algorithm of the dynamic analysis (DAA).     
c) Exhausted feedstock: If a VR generates an exhausted biomass, this biomass will be analysed to determine its most 
appropriate use considering three options: i) exhausted bioma ss will be sent to BIOM to assess the production of 
biofertilizers (task 4.5); ii) exhausted biomass will be dried and milled and analysed for use as a phytochemical free 
fibre (PFF) supply in WP4 (task 4.2.); and iii) tested in the biomass boiler for coge neration of electric energy. The 
results will be analysed and compared to determine the most suitable and sustainable use of each type of exhausted 
biomass between the 3 alternative valorisation possibilities.  
Task 3.1. Achieving maximum value & zero waste from olive feedstocks. VR-1 to 4; (M18-M50; LEADER: NATAC, INNO). 
Subtask 3.1.1.- Olive leaves; VR-1: Three batches of 5 MT of olive leaves, each batch with a different FSI will be sent 
by INNO (M24, Task 1.3), to carry out Phase I for VR -1. After TRL  7 (M38), Phase 2 will start, to assemble the 
valorisation route and joint production of all the bioproducts in this VR. To this end, 3 batches of 20MT/batch will be 
sent by INNO (M38, Task 1.3) to obtain Oleuropein 20%, Oleuropein 40%, Triterpenes 15%, Chlorophylls, Oleuropein 
80% and Elenolic acid 20%. Phase 2 will be conducted as described above and will conclude with TRL 8 (M48).  
VR-2: 5 MT of three batches with different FSIs suitable for VR-2 will be sent by INNO (M36) for realisation of Phase 
1. Phase 2 will be carried out in continuation, employing 3 new olive leaf batches of 20 MT each (M44) with different 
FSIs. These batches will be used to jointly obtain the bioproducts of VR -2 in a cascade manner: Triterpenes 30%, 
Triterpenes 60%, Polyphenols 15%, Fatty acids 80%; Oleanolic acid 90% and Oleanolic acid 98% at TRL8 (M50).  
Subtask 3.1.2.- Olive fruit skin. The olive skin will be separated from the pits by INNO (task 1.3). The olive pits side 
stream will be utilised in the biomass boilers to produce electric energy. Three feedstock batches of 3 MT each will 
be sent by INNO (M36, task 1.3) to effectuate Phase 1 and reach TRL  7. The assembly of the pro cesses to obtain all 
the bioproducts of VR-3 in a cascade manner will be conducted with 3 new batches of 6 MT of feedstock (M44), to 
obtain: Maslinic acid 25%, Maslinic acid 60% and Triterpenes 15% at TRL 8 (M50). 
Subtask 3.1.3.- Olive mil wastewater (OMW) : VR-4: Three batches of 25 MT of feedstock with different FSIs will be 
supplied by INNO (M18, task 1.3) to complete Phase 1. Phase 2 will be carried out with 3 new batches of 25 MT (M28) 
to obtain in a cascade manner the bioproducts : Polyphenols 5%, Hydroxytyrosol 20%; Hydroxytyrosol 60%, Fluvic 
acids 25%, Potassium 5% at TRL 8 (M36) and attain a surplus of water that will be recirculated in the factory (1.2.3.1.4) 
Results of this task will be provided in D3.1 to D3.7 
Task 3.2. Achieving maximum value & zero waste from artichoke feedstocks . VR 5 to 7; M18-M46; LEADER: NATAC, 
AGROS, CTAEX, DOP). 
Subtask 3.2.1.- Artichoke aerial part: Three batches of 2 MT of feedstock will be supplied by AGROS (M18, task 1.3) 
to complete the work contemplated in Phase 1. Afterwards, 3 new batches of 4 MT (M36) each will be employed to 
conclude the assembly of the processes in a cascade for the joint production of all the bioproducts of this VR. The 
products to obtain in this dynamic, cascaded flow include: Caffeoylquinic acids 6%; Cynaropicrine 3% and Cynaroside 
3% and Caffeoylquinic acids 4%.  
 
 
 Page 54 of 70 
Subtask 3.2.2.- Artichoke fruit bracts. Three batches of 4 MT feedstock with different FSIs will be supplied by AGROS 
(M24, task 1.3.2) to complete Phase 1. The final assembly of all processes in the route will be carried out in Phase Il 
to complete TRL 8 and obtain the bioproducts: Caffeoylquinic acids 12%; Chlorogenic acid 15%; Cynarine 2%, Fibre 
(AGROS) and Inuline, employing 3 new batches of feedstock, 10 MT each (M36). 
Subtask 3.2.3.- Cardoon aerial part. This process will be very similar to subtask 3.2.1 to verify the conditions used in 
this Phase 1 task are as well optimal for the 3x 0,5 MT batches of cardoon feedstock supplied by DOP (M30). The final 
assembly will be carried out in Phase 2, employing three batches of 1 MT each (M40) to obtain: Caffeoylquinic acids 
4% and 2%, and Chlorogenic acid 5% at TRL 8 (M46). 
The results of this task will be provided in D3.2 to D3.8 
Task 3.3. Achieving maximum value & zero waste from pomegranate. VR 8; M18-M44; LEADER: NATAC, AGROS). 
3 batches of 4 MT supplied by AGROS (M18, task 1.3) will be employed to carry out the work contemplated in Phase 
1. The final assembly of the cascade will be finished in Phase 2 using three batches of 8 MT each (M36) to obtain at 
TRL 8:  Punicalagins 40%; Ursolic acid 30%; Punicalagins 70%, Non-extractable polyphenols and Ellagic acid 30% (M44). 
Results of this task will be provided in D3.3 to D3.9 
Task 3.4. Achieving maximum value & zero waste from rosemary.VR 9-10; M24-M52;LEADER: NATAC, TABEX, CTAEX, ENEL). 
VR-9 y VR-10: 3 batches of 2 MT will be supplied by TABEX/ENEL (M24, task 1.2) and employed in Phase 1 for VR -9, 
and 3 other batches for VR-10 (M24, task 1.1). For the final assembly of the optimized conditions in a unique, cascaded 
flow and to complete the total qualification of the system in Phase 2, 3 batches of 2 MT will be employed for each VR 
(M42), in order to obtain: Rosmarinic acid 6%; Diterpenes 10%; Ursolic  acid 40% and Essential oil in VR -9; and 
Diterpenes 20%; Carnosic acid 40%, Ursolic acid 40% and Essential oil in VR-10 at TRL 8. Qualification parameters will 
be analysed in task 3.7, and exhausted feedstock in task 3.8. Results of this task will be provided in D3.4 to D3.10 
Task 3.5. Achieving maximum value & zero waste from lemon verbena. VR 11; M24-M50; LEADER: NATAC. TABEX, CATEX). 
Three batches of 2 MT will be supplied by TABEX (M24, task 1.2) to complete the work contemplated in Phase 1. 
Three new batches of 2 MT supplied by TABEX (M43) will be employed in Phase 2 to complete the qualification of the 
system and obtain: Verbascoside 25%, Essential oil; Polyphenols 15% and Verbascoside 50% at TRL 8 (M50).  
Results of this task will be provided in D3.5 to D3.11 
Task 3.6.   Achieving maximum value & zero waste from camomile. VR 12; M24-M52; LEADER: NATAC, TABEX, CTAEX). 
Three batches of 2 MT feedstock will be s upplied by TABEX (M24, task 1.2) to complete Phase 1. Phase 2 will be 
implemented with three new batches of 2 MT feedstock (M46), that will be processed jointly and in cascade for the 
production of the next bioproducts: Flavonoids 3-5%; Apigenins 8%; Apigenins 20%, Polyphenols 20% and Essential 
oil, and complete the qualification of the system at TRL 8 (M52). Results of this task will be provided in D3.6 to D3.12 
Task 3.7.- Demonstrating the replicability of DYANA Biorefinery M36-M52; LEADER: NATAC). 
In Tasks 3.1 to 3.6, 6 batches of each of the 6 feedstocks (3 for TRL 7, and 3 for TRL 8) coming from different origins 
will be analysed. The agro -industrial feedstocks will be supplied by different companies, from distinct locations and 
/or varieties, and  the cultivated crops will originate from various farms and will be obtained applying different 
cultivation conditions. In accordance with the scope of the topic, this task is designed to demonstrate the replicability 
of DYANA, employing 3 proofs of concep t with three sustainably -sourced feedstocks: a by -product of the wine 
production industry, a by-product of the avocado food industry and a different MAP, Echinacea sp., being cultivated 
in a national project by NATAC and TABEX. These 3 feedstocks will be s tudied to TRL 6: valorisation routes similar to 
the ones in SUSTAINEXT will be established, the products that can be obtained from these feedstocks will be detailed, 
the processes will be adapted to the equipment of the DYANA biorefinery and the production yields determined, the 
grade of innovation and the market interests will be assessed. Results of this task will be provided in D3.13 
WP MILESTONE 9: VR completed at TRL 7 (M42); MILESTONE 11: VR completed at TRL 8 (M52) 
WP4 PRODUCT APPLICATIONS: High value applications in the global market 
OBJECTIVES: 
- To demonstrate the market uptake by the end users developing final products for the markets of food supplements, 
food ingredients, feed for pets and farm animals, cosmetic products, bio -based fertilizers, and performance 
chemicals. 
- To develop and deliver new and sustainable food supplements that have high efficacy and high value in the market 
by utilizing the plant-based extracts generated from the different valorisation routes from WP3. 
- To develop and deliver food ingredients based on plant-based extracts and fibre from extracted biomass. 
 
 
 Page 55 of 70 
- To develop and deliver a functional infusion for stress relief-modulation and sleep induction. 
- To develop and deliver antioxidant and antimicrobial technological ingredients for food applications. 
- To develop and deliver PET formulations for improving gastrointestinal health of dogs and cats.  
- To develop and deliver new formulations with feed additives based on plant-based extracts to be tested in trials 
with farm animals. 
- To develop and deliver  new cosmetic formulations using selected derived bioproducts and complete pre -market 
studies 
- To develop bio-based fertilizers targeted to the necessities of MAP crops. 
DESCRIPTION OF WORK  
End users will start to work with the current available samples from the classical mono -product model and new 
samples already obtained at TRL 6. In a second phase of the project, 46 plant -based healthy extracts and functional 
ingredients (obtained in WP3) at TRL 8 will be tested in Task 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 4.5, 4.6. 
Task 4.1. Food supplements market (M2-M52; LEADER: NUT; NATAC). 
Subtask 4.1.1. Characterization, product formulation and stability studies.  NUT will characterize at least 35 plant -
based extracts generated from the different VRs from WP3 (see table 1.1) and select the most appropriate candidates 
for the following market applications: cardiovascular, liver, antioxidants, sleep, and beauty. The new products will be 
analysed according to different parameters (purity, humidity, rheology, granulometry, density, DSC) and a galenic 
formulation will be proposed. Stability studies of the formulations will be conducted, to know the useful life of the 
preparations, validate the galenic formulation, and demonstrate that the formula is stable from a pharmaco-technical 
and microbiological point of view. NUT will perform stress tests on binary mixtures of the active ingredients present 
in the product with selected excipients for the product formulation.  The determination of incompatibility will be 
assessed through organoleptic discrimination. Novel galenic formulas for selected applications will be designed, both 
solid and liquid. Sensorial parameters, viscosity and foam/agglomerates formation will be also adjusted during the 
development process of the liquid galenic forms. 
Subtask 4.1.2. Sophistication: food supplements “a la carte”.  NUT will upgrade the previously developed formulations 
according to the individual specifications by using a highly innovative platform developed by NUT. For each application 
(cardiovascular, liver, antioxidant, sleep, and beauty), different active-compounds delivery methodologies or a 
combination of them will be tested. Based on the characteristic and functional application of each extract, NUT will 
develop different release techniques. Verification of the active ingredients in the proposed final galenic formula and 
stability analyses in accelerated aging tests will be conducted. In some cases, taste tests will also be carried out. 
Subtask 4.1.3. Industrialization and market route.  NUT will evaluate the health claims and therapeutic action, 
established by the E.U. in terms of food supplements, of the formulated prototypes. The technological variables and 
parameters for the manufacture of new products will be studied. The manufacturi ng process will be defined by 
working with batches at different scales to achieve mixing mechanisms and optimal times to obtain the final product 
in compliance with the specifications established above. Finally, a commercial presentation to obtain a commercially 
viable product will be established. Results of this task will be provided in D4.1 and D4.2. 
Task 4.2. Food ingredients applications (M6-M52; LEADER: STAR; AGROS, NATAC). 
Subtask 4.2.1. Camomile based functional infusion.  STAR will receive 4 different Camomile extracts sent by NATAC 
(M12/24/36) to be used for the development of functional soluble infusion prototypes. These infusions will combine 
the bioactivity and taste of chamomile extract with other plant -based extracts ( from the different VRs in WP3 ) to 
obtain a final product tailored for stress relief -modulation and sleep induction. Final products with the desired and 
well recognized sensorial profile of the current chamomile-based stock keeping units (SKUs) will proceed to the pilot 
scale development. Two different batches will be produced for each approved formula using fluid bed granulator pilot 
plant. All the samples produced will be analysed to verify that the analytical standards of the botanical extracts are 
fulfilled. The evaluation will be performed in three phases: i) Product technical evaluation: 5 samples will be analysed 
to evaluate the technical features (granularity, humidity, flow proprieties) to gauge the industrial machinability and 
packaging of the finished formulas. Accor ding to the outcomes of the technical evaluation, the industrial approved 
formulas will continue the screening path; ii) Product sensorial profile evaluation: triangle tests will be carried out to 
evaluate if there are any perceptible sensory distinction b etween the new developed camomile formula and the 
market standards (in accordance to ISO 4120 Standards). Only products with a statistically approved sensorial profiles 
will move to the next stage; iii) Efficacy and tolerability evaluation: finished final formulas will be evaluated in healthy 
subjects through a real-life survey to test its effectiveness. 
 
 
 Page 56 of 70 
Subtask 4.2.2. Antimicrobial and antioxidant ingredients in food products. STAR will evaluate the antimicrobial activity 
of 8 botanical extracts produced in WP3, the best 2/3 candidates will be validated in 2 different food applications: i) 
to replace the use of EDTA as antioxidant in mayonnaise with a natural extract, ii) to reduce the oxidation effect in an 
artichoke pesto (standard artichoke pesto shows browning on the surface after 3 months of shelf-life). For this second 
application, the objective is to compare the antioxidant activity of the extracts with the traditional re cipe of pesto 
without any antioxidant. A total of 7 samples will be formulated for each product to compare the functionality of the 
bioactive extracts against the use of the standard product. The evaluation will be performed in three phases: i) 
Sensorial evaluation tests: triangle test will be carried out comparing the new product (mayonnaise and artichoke 
pesto) developed with the reference sample; ii) Shelf -life tests: Test and reference samples will be stored in 
accelerated conditions and the visual pres ence of oxidation, antioxidant power and analytical composition will be 
determined; iii) Sensorial characterization: all the tests that will show an improvement from analytical point of view 
will be submitted to a sensorial characterization in comparison with the reference sample. Results of this task will be 
provided in D4.3 and D4.4. 
Subtask 4.2.3. Validation of the raw materials and technologies to be used as PFF. AGROS will receive milled and dried 
artichoke and pomegranate exhausted biomass produced in WP3 from VR-5 to 8 (PFF) and artichoke fibre from VR -
6. AGROS will characterize the raw materials in terms of their total, soluble and insoluble dietary fibre conte nt, 
verifying they have a content greater than 40% in dietary fibre, necessary for obtaining the desired ingredient. Trials 
will be carried out to define the minimum possible particle size after micronization. Artichoke and pomegranate PFF 
will be treated using enzymes with ligninolytic and cellulosic activity and their effect on soluble and insoluble dietary 
fibre, on the total solubility of the ingredient and on the performance of the process and the conditions of the 
enzymatic treatment (water:substrate ratio, pH and temperature) will be monitored. The ingredient treated with the 
enzymes will be recovered by drying at low pressures in rotary and/or static tray dryers. The dehydrated product will 
be subjected to pre-industrial conditions.  
Subtask 4.2.4. Characterization of the ingredients produced. Food products applications. AGROS will characterize the 
new ingredients produced by physicochemical and rheological analysis. Their capacity to interact with water, fats and 
water/fat systems will be determined to predict their behaviour in certain food matrices and to design final market 
applications in certain types of products. Demonstrations with these ingredients will be carried out at the 
manufacturing customers facilities for their technological function ( thickener, texturizer, emulsifier, etc.). Three 
different food matrices (target foods) will be selected, adjusting the application dose of each ingredient. AGROS will 
evaluate the technological, nutritional, and organoleptic properties after the incorporation of the final ingredient into 
the developed prototypes. These properties will predetermine both the application dose of the ingredients and the 
variables of the production process of the target food where they will be finally used. Results of this task will be 
provided in D4.5. 
Task 4.3. Pet market: dogs and cats (M6-M52; LEADER: ACEL; UNITO, NATAC). 
Subtask 4.3.1. Validation of the selected extracts.  ACEL will select between 8 and 10 products from different VRs in 
WP3, based on preliminary activity of the ingredients in animal nutrition. Anti -inflammatory, antioxidant, and 
pre/probiotic activities will be confirmed through in vitro  tests, comparing with previous activities reported for 
selected extracts. After confirming functional activity, UNITO will conduct in vivo studies in dog and cats with the 3 
best candidates to evaluate the potential activity of the plant extracts, testing different formulations. Total apparent 
digestibility coefficients of the diet supplement ed with the extracts (dry matter, organic matter, protein, fat and 
energy) will be evaluated at the beginning and at the end of the experimental period.  
Subtask 4.3.2. Product evaluation in cats and dogs. UNITO will evaluate the clinical condition, body weight and body 
condition of the pets at different periods of the study. Blood samples will be collected before and at the end of the 
trials to validate the clinical activities of the bioproducts including general health, anti -inflammatory activity and 
antioxidant activity. Faecal analyses will be conducted to evaluate the general health and the gut health and to 
monitor the integrity of the gut immunological barrier. All these studies will be conducted with previous approval by 
the Committee on Animal Research and Ethics. 
Subtask 4.3.3. Galenic technology development and final pet product registration. ACEL will develop the most suitable 
galenic formulation to be used in animal feeding, testing different formulations in pilot trials. Specific mixability and 
tableting testing will be performed. The most performing substance will be selected for registration as feed additive 
under regulation 1831/2003, in the proper functional group based on its efficacy. ACEL will lead all the registration 
activities including  stability studies, homogeneity studies, complete characterization, efficacy studies and safety 
studies to obtain the final pet product registration. Results of this task will be provided in D4.6 and D4.7. 
Task 4.4. Farm animal market (M6-M52; LEADER: MIAV; NATAC). 
 
 
 Page 57 of 70 
Subtask 4.4.1.- Validation and formulation of the extracts for feed additive applications.  MIAVIT will select a total of 
16 products from the different VRs produced by NATAC (see table 1.1) to validate their application in feeds for 
different farm animals, selecting the most appropriate in each case (mainly poultry, but also ruminants will be 
considered). The development team will carry out a scientific evaluation of the pre-selected products and acceptance 
in accordance with legislation & QA rules will be also considered to finally select 4 -5 candidates for in vivo tests. A 
sample feed formula will be initially produced (up to 100 kg) and different parameters  will be tested including 
flowability, quality, self -life and stability, antioxidant, and antimicrobial in -vitro activities, to validate the product 
before the production of the final industrial formula.  
Subtask 4.4.2- Application of PFF from VRs (WP3) as ingredient in feed formulations.  MIAVIT will receive PFF samples 
from 6 of the VRs to evaluate the potential interest of this fibre product as an ingredient in feed applications. PFF will 
be characterized in terms of their total, soluble and insoluble dietary fibre content, verifying they have a good content 
of non-soluble fibre to be considered for feed products. The application of this ingredient in feed for breeding animals 
will be evaluated for its nutritional and healthy properties, and performance. 
Subtask 4.4.3- Final products to the farm market. After validation, the industrial selected formulas will be produced 
(800kg) and acceptance tests will be performed in experimental farms with different animal groups (at least poultry 
and ruminants) testing  a control group and two doses of the selected feed additive. The parameters to tests will 
include feed intake, feed conversion ratio (FCR) and specific feeding rate (SFR), as well as the efficacy against different 
stressing factors as heat-stress and oxidative stress. Commercial farms test will be used to validate the experimental 
results. Results of this task will be provided in D4.8. 
Task 4.5.  Bio-based fertilizers (M3-M52; LEADER: BIOM; CTAEX, NATAC).  
Subtask 4.5.1- Development of bio-based fertilizers from exhausted biomass. BIOM will receive exhausted biomass 
samples (2MT to 10 MT) from VR-1 to VR-4; VR-7 and VR-9 to 12 (M3, M12; M18, M24, M36, M48). In addition to the 
use of all these biowaste or by -product materials, other components may be used in the experimental fertilizers 
formulation, like ashes from the biomass combustion boiler form the DYANA biorefinery, as well as other additives 
(biochar, recovered clays from food industry used as filtration media -diatomite, bentonite-) that will add water and 
nutrient retention capacities, increasing the fertilizer’s efficiency and reducing lixiviation.  Novel bio-based fertilisers 
formulation will look out to fit into PFCs – Product Functional Categories of the FPR -Fertilising Products Regulation 
EU 2019/1009. 
Subtask 4.5.2- Validation and application of the final products. Field trials will be conducted on the three target MAP 
crops: camomile, rosemary, and lemon verbena, with the collaboration of INP, TABEX and CTAEX. Randomized trials 
will be designed. The analytical parameters to be evaluated during the crop cycle and at the end of the season will be 
vegetal growth, roots development, plant weight, productivity, nutritional status (e.g. foliar analysis of macro - and 
micronutrients), and industrial yield of extracts, soil fertility and functionality (e.g. soil contents of organic matter) 
among others. 10 MT of organic amendment / organic fertilizer, at different formulations, to be used for “Pre-seedling 
fertilization in substitution of mineral fertilizers. Production yield of the tested crops will be monitored in order to 
validate the positive effect of the fertilizers developed. Results of this task will be provided in D4.9. 
Task 4.6.  Cosmetics products (M6-M52; LEADER: MBL; NATAC). 
A total of 15 samples from different VRs (WP3) produced by NATAC (see cosmetic uses in table 1.1) will be received 
during M12; M18, M24, M36. MBL will re-formulate, analyse and profile the samples received by NATAC according 
to their characteristic s. Solubility, formulation stability and antioxidant activity will be validated in all of them. 
Differentiated and unique extracts from several upcycled material generated in the state -of-the-art facilities from 
Natac will play a special role in selection for cosmetic applications, possible market applications and helping also to 
promote the reduction of biowaste and upcycled materials generation. Nano-encapsulation and liposome formations, 
realised under microfluidics, will be specifically designed for cosmetics applications as well as trials of increasing the 
bioavailability from the different lead -extracts. Different types of emulgents, carrier materials, polymers and fatty 
acids will be formulated together with the extracts to reach a perfect and stable formulations. After selecting the lead 
extracts, a series of efficacy studies on different skin cells from the dermis and epidermis will be performed as pre -
market studies. These studies will be conducted with external partner institutes specialized in ski n cell culture 
experiments. Analyses would be skin explants after treatment with the extracts initially estimated are: i) Antioxidant 
potential (extra-and intracellular) of extracts; ii) Gene expression analysis of known aging and skin parameter genes 
(e.g. collagen, skin differentiation markers); iii) Ability to protect cellular proteins and/or DNA from UV and other 
oxidative stresses; iv) Possibility for custom readouts tailored to the lead substances found in the extract and their 
potentially known activities. Upon positive results, further efficacy assays on 3D skin models or skin explants could be 
 
 
 Page 58 of 70 
performed, the specific readout would depend on the results previously obtained in 2D culture experiments Results 
of this task will be provided in D4.10. 
WP MILESTONE 12 Ready-to-market end users’ products and formulations. (M52) 
WP5 TOWARDS ZERO ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT AND REGULATORY COMPLIANCE 
OBJECTIVES:  
- To conduct a Life Cycle Cost Analysis (LCCA) for the DYANA model system to identify the economic effects of 
implementing the new technologies and operative approaches 
- To conduct a Life Cycle Assessment (LCAs) of the new VRs enabled by DYANA to identify environmental aspects 
and impacts and to compare the integrated biorefinery processes to linear processes  
- To conduct a Social Life Cycle Assessment (S-LCA) of the proposed solutions in SUSTAINEXT 
- To evaluate the circularity of the current valorisation status and of the resulting conditions after the project  
- To develop content and indicators for environmental and social communications of the different products and 
for different stakeholders/target audiences.  
- To enhance the opportunities to create new business models and develop innovative products from the 
perspective of sustainability, e.g., with innovation workshops with partners.   
- To identify barriers, limitations, regulatory/legislation aspects and product safety issues that could affect the 
market entrance and exploitation of the produced bioproducts 
DESCRIPTION OF WORK  
WP5´s main objective is to evaluate the full costs and environmental performance of the valorisation processes to 
produce high value herbal extracts by means of a novel dynamic bio -refinery system. This includes tuning the 
suitability of the feedstocks and the adapti ve operation of the bio -refinery. Potential social consequences, such as 
market acceptability issues and potential benefits for the involved stakeholders, will be identified as well. 
Task 5.1. Life Cycle Cost Assessment (LCCA) (Lead partner: ECO, Other partners: all [M10-M52]. 
For evaluating the economic performance of biorefineries various perspectives can be considered: a) the detailed 
plant-level process evaluation for process costs, integration benefits, and product yields; b) supply chain 
considerations for identifying economically beneficial supply chain configurations, and c) economic market modelling 
for identifying the biomass market impacts in terms of biomass prices. This LCCA will be performed to evaluate 
primarily a) and b). Based on the inputs of all project partners (especially those in the supply chain) a LCCA will be 
implemented to understand the cost in real applications considering the whole life cycle of the upscaled solution. The 
analysis comprises initial costs and discounted future costs over the system’s life cycle. The economic assessment will 
explore the upgrade of the existing production facilities with the envisaged dynamic system, to evaluate the 
soundness of investments. The results of the economic analysis will take account of the impact of the varied sourcing 
of feedstocks, the novel pre-treatments, the multi-output facility operation incl. the energy and material flows, and 
their effects on capital and O&M cost. This task lays down the basis for evaluating business models. The s ystem 
boundaries will be defined to enable meaningful comparisons between the new and other existing competing 
processes, based on input from the supply and end -user partners. Cost categories and items (primary data) will be 
preferably collected from partn ers through direct exchange (surveys/workshop during project meetings), and 
secondary data may be based on estimations, and references from similar production systems and/or technologies. 
The 2019 “Technical, Economic and Environmental Assessment of Biorefinery Concepts” from the IEA BioEnergy - Task 
42: Biorefining in a Circular Economy will be used as basis for the LCCA, together with publications. experiments 
Results of this task will be provided in D5.1. 
Task 5.2. Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) Lead partner: ECO, Other partners: all [M15 -M54] 
In parallel to the LCCA in Task 5.1 and sharing the same boundary conditions, a Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) will be 
performed to quantify the environmental aspect and impacts of the integrated biorefining processes as well as for 
the resulting valorisation routes (min. 8 to max. 12) by identifying and quantifying energy, resources and material 
uses and releases to the environment. Task 5.2 will identify valorisation scenarios and their environmental gains and 
burdens along the complete life cycle. Attention will be given to the identification of key parameters which are most 
important for LCA impact results, to find those parameters that are driving future changes of life cycle data. The LCA 
will model the processes (sourcing, transport of raw materials, p re-treatment, extraction, final products), as well as 
the material and energy flows. The specific goal and scope of the LCA shall be detailed during the development of the 
project, however, the general purposes of the LCA in the present are: 
 
 
 Page 59 of 70 
- Supporting the full development process of the DYANA biorefinery concept and of the planned products with 
environmental indicators and comparisons, to take environmentally conscious decisions.  
- Gather and obtain data to present the environmental performance and impact of the project, as well as support 
the further implementation of the technology in the future. A full LCA of the process will first be conducted, then 
an LCA for the resulting valorisation routes will be conducted building on the processes. For the new valorisation 
routes there is no previous LCA, only an LCA of single processes can be used as benchmark, so the LCAs of the 
project will become the benchmark for the future operation. 
- Use results to communicate the environmental aspects and impact along the ent ire life cycle, and to optimise 
proposed solutions following Ecodesign principles. Generate “fact -sheets” or environmental product profiles 
with KPIs for selected target audiences.  
- Build capacity of project stakeholders and partners by showing the environmental performance at critical points 
in the project (status and after implementation), by means of workshops, which also shall serve to gather 
relevant primary data and validate results.  
- Validate the “Do no significant Harm principle” of the project: the indicators and results from the LCA will be the 
backbone of the 6 environmental objectives within Art. 17 of the EU Taxonomy Regulation 
The inventory and impact assessment modelling  will be conducted using the Software SimaPro, with the extensive 
environmental databases Ecoinvent, Agrifootprint and the European Life Cycle Database ELCD (as appropriate), and 
with scientifically valid impact assessment methods (e.g. Environmental Footprint Method v3.0). Results of this task 
will be provided in D5.2. 
MILESTONE 13 LCA completed for 12 VR and 46 Products (M54) 
Task 5.3. Social Life Cycle Assessment (S-LCA) Lead partner: ECO, Other partners: all [M15-M50] 
A social Life Cycle Assessment (S-LCA) will consider the direct and indirect social impacts generated by the project on 
all the stakeholders across the value chain. The assessment will be performed by using a set of impact items, classified 
both by stakeho lders and impact categories, to identify relevant fields of analysis such as human rights, working 
conditions, health and safety, governance and socioeconomic repercussions (materiality assessment and Hot-spots). 
Particular attention will be given to the a ssessment of the new processes and technologies and their impacts on 
employment and general wellbeing of local communities. A comprehensive data collection will be performed through 
the use of quantitative -qualitative direct surveys, targeting the main sta keholder groups identified: workers, local 
communities and agriculture companies. The Social Life Cycle Assessment (S-LCA) results will be presented together 
with the Life Cycle Cost Analysis (LCCA), and the LCA in a comprehensive Socio-Economic Impact Assessment report, 
which will provide a perspective on both economic and social benefits.  The socio-economic impact assessment report 
will be developed according to the following steps:  
- On-site visits and/or active exchange with partners involved (e.g., wor kshop and customized questionnaires for 
the participants and stakeholders involved), for description and understanding of the processes involved and data 
available.  
- Data structuring and complementary development of the LCCA, LCA and the S -LCA models, for this later one, 
according to the ISO 14040  framework, and the 2009 UNEP  Guidelines for Soci al Life Cycle Assessment of 
Products.  
- Discussion of the S-LCA model and interpretation of its result, incl. reporting and communication options.  
The modelling will be carried out with the PSILCA Database v3.0 for the SimaPro Software. PSILCA allows calculation 
and assessment of the social impacts of products along the products’ entire life cycles, considering global supply 
chains and services, and to detect social hot-spots. Results of this task will be provided in D5.3. 
Task 5.4. Circularity assessment Lead partner: ECO, Other partners: all [M10-M50] 
This task focuses on identifying the circular value from the products and materials, and mitigate risks from wasted 
materials, in relation to their supply. In parallel to the LCA in Task 5.2, and sharing the same boundary conditions, a 
Circularity Assessment (CA) is performed following the Methodology of the Ellen MacArthur Foundation for Material 
Circularity Indicators, to quantify the so -called restorative material flows of products, up to company level, with 
additional indicators to evaluate impacts and risks. These CA indicators build the base for internal decision making, 
for the evaluation and reporting of partners and on project performance, especially for the goals of zero waste and 
maximizing value of materials along the supply chain.  
The assessment will be done for two scenarios: to evaluate the circularity indicators at current status and after process 
and technology implementation. The objective is to identify potential for improvements, new streams of materials 
and energy for closing the loops a nd also for developing the information for communication instruments (e.g., Fact 
 
 
 Page 60 of 70 
sheets of products) to target audiences (e.g., end -users). For example, the valorisation of feedstocks can be 
understood beyond the biorefinery, by looking also at the agricul tural industries and how productivity increase is 
taken back into other or same agricultural industries, e.g., with the production of bio -fertilizers that reduce or 
eliminate the input from synthetic fertilizers.  
The participation of partners is key in th e CA, to define the indicators and data, to explore the processes and 
valorisation routes, and to evaluate the ex -ante and post-ante conditions. In light of creating business models that 
capture the value of the organic waste and residual streams to produc e new products, and building a local bio -
economy in Extremadura, it is desired to maximize the potential for higher circularity along the supply chain, 
considering the input -output of the operations and of the streams for closing the loops of materials and  energy. 
Results of this task will be provided in D5.4. 
Task 5.5: Regulatory, legal and beyond legal limitations. (M8-M52; LEADER: NATAC; all partners). 
All potential hazards to ensure compliance with the EU legislation will be evaluated. The verification that the 
bioproducts comply with the existing regulatory landscape for the use of the rest raw materials and the use of the 
final products on the envisag ed applications and fulfil EC Directives and specific national laws on chemicals risk 
management, toxicity and safety. Regulatory compliance will be regularly checked throughout the project. The 
assessment should be performed before the end of the project to enable any processing/product specification 
changes. Input from final users is required. A regulatory compliance report will be written to make sure that the 
products and technologies also fulfil all standards and legislation in force with regards to safety criteria. Results of this 
task will be provided in D.5.5 
WP6 D&C & EXPLOITATION: Fostering policy makers, stakeholders and general public awareness for 
biobased opportunities 
OBJECTIVES:   
- To design, deploy and assess the project’s D&C strategy, disseminate the project results to the targeted public 
and interested parties.  
- To communicate activities concerning the whole project and target a much wider audience, including the media 
and the general public. 
- To develop a SUSTAINEXT community. To create a framework for a multi -actor approach and dissemination of 
the projects’ results seeking acceptance, engagement, collaboration, and replicability.  
- Foster support to deploy sustainable circular bio-based solutions across Europe 
- To establish synergies with other relevant projects, initiatives, and organizations. To ensure the exploitation of 
project results for further research, commercial purposes, and policymaking. 
DESCRIPTION OF WORK  
Task 6.1. Dissemination and communication strategy  (M1-M54; BIOPLAT, all partners). The main aim is to enhance 
project visibility, create market opportunities and foster collaboration with all the stakeholders to contribute to the 
uptake and exploitation of project outcomes.  
Subtask 6.1.1 Development of SUSTAINEXT image and network .  Firstly, a full visual identity ( logo, style guideline, 
templates, for deliverables, reports, and letters etc. in compliance with the CBE/European Commission visual 
Recommendations). This will contribute to the creation of a uniform appearance of the consor tium. In month 3 
website will be launched as the main repository of public information. During the first months of the Project, BIOPLAT 
will develop a Dissemination & Communication plan (M6 and updated in M24). This plan will further elaborate the 
content of section 2.2 of the Impact section of the proposal. It will include basic messages of the project; definition 
of target audiences (Primary producers, Industry players, Academia, policy makers and general audiences); 
communication and dissemination action s description (channels, examples); an implementation calendar and an 
excel document to track progress. As part of this task, a contact network to communicate and disseminate the results 
and carry out the multi -actor approach process will be developed. Net work will be performed taking advantage of 
consortium partners' relations with the agriculture/farmers, industry, biorefineries, circularity, businesses, brand -
owners, associations, communities, NGO’s, decision -makers; contacts from the wide BIOPLAT’s nati onal and EU 
network. A Data Management Plan (DMP) will be established (M6). The DMP will describe a general data management 
policy to be adopted by all partners for all the datasets that will be generated during the project. 
Subtask 6.1.2 Dissemination act ivities. BIOPLAT will coordinate and track the implementation of dissemination 
actions, all partners are expected to collaborate and actively participate to reach the set targets. Dissemination 
activities will target the previously identified key stakeholders by performing activities defined in section 2 including 
among other: networking activities (meetings to promote results or promotion of results through networks resources 
 
 
 Page 61 of 70 
-newsletters, social media…), at least 8 publications and communications on sustainable bi o-based products 
production, circular economy, trade fairs and partnering events, 1 e -newsletter will be published per year. A first 
introductory video will be published by M15 with the aim to convey, in a very visual and comprehensive way, the 
project concept, its fundamentals and capabilities to induce environmental and socioeconomic benefits for society. 
A second video focused on the scientific -technical and industrial developments and potential exploitation of the 
project results will be published in the last year of the project (M54). All the KPIs related to dissemination have already 
been described in section 2 of the proposal.  
Subtask 6.1.3 Communication activities:  The communication activities will be the Project website, set up at the 
beginning of the project, which will be constantly monitored and regularly updated. This site will remain online for at 
least two years after the project’s completion, with a potential lifetime extension, according to the post-project D&C 
plan; an internal website/tool  for the consortium communication; a Project Flyer containing the industrial 
developments and their benefits for society, the economy and the environment, along with its potential replicability 
and Other communication activities, such as social media accou nts (LinkedIn and YouTube) as well as advertising 
materials (posters and roll -up) to assist with disseminating the project at different events. Press releases will be 
published at the kick -off meeting and every time that a relevant outcome must be shared w ith the media. A final  
conference will take place in Extremadura to present the flagship and main project results. Gender balance will be 
guaranteed when choosing the speakers. Results of this task will be provided in D.6.1 to D.6.6 
Task 6.2. Liaison and networking activities with relevant actors, initiatives, and organisations  (M1-M54; BIOPLAT, all 
partners). Liaison and networking activities will seek collaborations and establish a dialogue with different 
EU/International projects and initiatives relating to SUSTAINEXT’s scope and activities. As well as relevant networks 
and organizations such as the National bioeconomy clusters and biorefinery initiatives (and their members) at 
European and National levels. Moreover, connections with relevant  associations focusing on gender equality and 
equity (such as Hypatia) will also be established, to further engage diverse and gender -balanced audiences or 
interested parties in SUSTAINEXT. Results of this task will be provided in D.6.6 
Task 6.3.   Multi-actor approach to enhance public awareness and acceptance of bio -based solutions  (M1-M54; 
FUNDECYT, NATAC, BIOPLAT).  Multi-actor approach will be conducted according to the methodology explained in 
section 1.2.4. A first plan will be drafted in M8 to define goals and design the strategy to be implemented throughout 
the project. This plan will include the material issues already raised by the stakeholders and how the project 
implementation impacts in them. The strategy will be reviewed on a year basis,  in close collaboration with the 
stakeholders through an open dialogue. The main objective of this action is to ensure that SUSTAINEXT is 
implemented according to stakeholder’s priorities, maximizing policymakers, end users and local community 
engagement and fostering the acceptance of biobased opportunities. Results of this task will be provided in D.6.7 
MILESTONE 3 First multi-actor (year 1 and year 2) approach materiality assessment completed and prioritized with 
stakeholders (M3) 
Task 6.4. Paving the way towards exploitation. (M1-M54; NATAC, BIOPLAT, ALL): An exploitation strategy will be 
reformulated from the preliminary draft presented in this proposal, based on KERs herein defined.  
Subtask 6.4.1: Market study and landscape analysis. Competitive watch. (NATAC, BIOPLAT, ALL): An in-depth market 
analysis covering all scales and activities will be performed since the beginning of the project with the aim to identify 
the market volume and key actors, especially for the 46 plant -based healthy extracts and functional ingredients and 
with emphasis in both the 33 products already existing and the potential market for the newly developed 13. By M12 
initial market reports will be presented, providing an overview of each key sector and application, and identifying high 
level opportunities. This comprehensive market research will continue through to M42 when more in -depth market 
reports will be delivered, providing a full assessment of the current position and future potential, including details of 
all current and planned activities in all key sectors. 
Subtask 6.4.2: Business case development and analysis. (NATAC, BIOPLAT, ALL):  Following the initial BP presented as 
an annex and combining the findings from subtask 6.4.1 with additional stakeholder/partners input, priority areas will 
be identified based on the market potential in key applications and the sca le of impact on the supply base. NATAC 
will lead this activity supported by supply chain actors and the consortium partners to prepare, test, and refine a 
number of key business models (using Business Model Canvas methodology) and their transferability into the priority 
sectors. We will quantify the value, in economic, environmental, and social terms, of existing, new and novel 
approaches, focusing on improved structure, value at each step and overall impact on the respective industries. Task 
6.4.2 will qua ntify the impact of the current barriers and will develop viable solutions. In M20 suggested business 
models will be presented and a final report describing and justifying the business models that have been developed 
through a combination of scenario modelling, case studies and impact assessments will be presented in M50. 
 
 
 Page 62 of 70 
Subtask 6.4.3: Exploitation Planning. (NATAC, BIOPLAT, ALL): For each key exploitable result, a Business & 
Exploitation plan will be drawn up in consistency with the business models (T6.4.2). Draft Business & Exploitation 
Plans will be delivered at M24 and final plans in M54. Business & Exploitation Plans will be structured as follows:  
- Development status: scale and nature of potential impact, competition differentiation, IPR issues & solutions 
- The exploitation team: identifying internal (project) and external partners required for exploitation   
- The market: geographical and economic size, trends, competitors and competitive advantage 
- The business model: marketing strategy, target clients and stakeholders, approach, value proposition 
- The financial projections: sales forecasts, investment requirements and other funding channels 
- The commercialisation roadmap: steps required before market launch (i.e. PoC, demonstration, etc). 
Subtask 6.4.4: IPR Management  (NATAC, BIOPLAT, ALL ): This task will implement a strategy for knowledge 
management and protection and will be of vital importance during the project as its effective execution will pave the 
way forward for effective and timely dissemination. All knowledge generated during the project will be assessed for 
its novelty, to enable the most appropriate IPR strategy to be defined. A commonly accepted course of action will be 
performed for the management of knowledge (approval and publication of document versions) following the IAPED 
methodology: Identify–Assess–Protect–Exploit-Disseminate. Results will be included as part of the exploitation plans 
in M24 and M54) 
Subtask 6.4.5: Paving the way towards market launching (NATAC, ALL). Following the information gathered in subtasks 
6.4.1-6.4.3, since first KER are obtained, the whole consortium, and especially partners with KER (NATAC, brand 
owners) will follow a plan for commercialisation readiness in close ink with D&C activities. T his plan will include all 
pre-commercial actions to prepare for market launching right after the project: identification of key decision makers 
in the client’s side, visiting potential target costumers, tradeshows exhibiting and attendance, samples sending, DEMO 
of digital tool developed in subtask 2.4.5, among others. Results will be presented in M36 and M54. 
Results of this task will be provided in D.6.8 to D.6.10  
WP7 PROJECT MANAGEMENT - Ensuring the accomplishments of objectives and expected impacts 
OBJECTIVES  
- To guarantee the most effective project implementation in accordance with the timetable and budget  
- To ensure smooth communication between the partners involved in the project and fulfilment of obligations, 
- To monitor technical excellence of project implementation as well as to monitor and manage potential risks, 
introduce mitigation measures and contingency plans if necessary. 
DESCRIPTION OF WORK  
Task 7.1: Project consortium management (M1-M354; LEADER: NATAC) 
This task will focus on general management of the project implementation:  administrative, contractual, legal, and 
financial. NATAC, as Project Coordinator (PC), will ensure: 
- Establishment of a clear definition of roles, ensuring a correct development of the project. 
- Designation of a Management Support Team to assist PC during the project management. 
- Timely and effective completion of project tasks, submission of deliverables, milestone reports and monitoring 
the project progress. 
- Organisation of the kick-off meeting and periodical meetings (General Assembly meetings), support continuous 
communication between all the partners, proper level of involvement and fulfilment of partner obligations. 
- Communication with the EC, fulfilment of contractual obligations and legal matters. 
- Co-ordination of the payments and the distribution of the EC Grant Contribution.   
Task 7.2: Technical, ethical, financial and risk management (M1-M54; LEADER: NATAC) 
NATAC will regularly monitor project implementation in relation to: 
- Proper implementation of tasks regarding technical aspects of the project; NATAC will monitor the quality of the 
technical features of the implemented actions and milestones achieved. 
- Management of ethical issues.  
- Control of the financial expenses of the project to assure they are in line with the expected.  
- Risk management concernin g defined and possible unforeseen risks, together with mitigation 
measures/contingency plans if relevant. In the case corrective measures should be introduced, NATAC will assess 
the situation and activate necessary actions. Identified risks will be updated during each of the reporting periods. 
 
 
 Page 63 of 70 
- A detailed plan presenting potential risks that could hinder successful project implementation, together with 
mitigation measures and contingency plans will be presented initially at M10 and will be updated at M40 aft er 
identifying potential risks not considered at the beginning of the project. 
Results of this task will be provided in D.7.1 and D.7.2 
Task 7.3: Flagship construction management (M1-M54; LEADER: NATAC) 
NATAC will designate and conform a Flagship Management Team specially devoted to managing and follow the 
flagship construction. This team will be composed of Mr. Francisco Alcaín (Chief Industrial Officer of Natac), Mr. Jorge 
Sanchez (Facilities and maintenance Manager), Ms. Rocio Navarro (General Manager for Industry in ARRAM), Mr. Jose 
Mª Pinilla (SUSTAINEXT Project Manager).  
The main aim of the team is to ensure the smooth development of the flagship construction: i) Monitor and follow 
the construction plan; ii) Manage licence applications and follow up; iii) Contact and relation with plant equipment 
suppliers and service providers; iv) Administrative management.; v) Identify, detect, and manage risks and definition 
of contingency plans.  MILESTONE 14 Flagship completed and ready to operate (M54). 
 
3.1.5. List of deliverables (3.1c) 
Table 3.1c List of deliverables 
Nº Deliverable Name WP PARTNER Typ
e 
Disse
mina
tion 
level 
Delivery 
Date (in 
months) 
D.1.1 Report on the implementation of the selected crop and installation 
of the monitoring systems 1 ENEL 
ES/ENEL IT R CO M12 
D.1.2 Initial/Intermediate/ Final report on the harvesting of wet biomass 
for the selected agrivoltaics crops 1 ENEL 
ES/ENEL IT R CO M24/36/
51 
D.1.3 Interm./Final reports on camomile cultivation in tobacco fields 1 INP R CO M24/51 
D.1.4 Interm./Final reports on rosemary cultivation in tobacco fields 1 TABEX R CO M26/51 
D.1.5 Interm./Final reports on lemon verbena cultivation in tobacco fields 1 CTAEX R CO M26/51 
D.1.6 Intermediate/Final reports on olive feedstocks 1 INNO R CO M22/48 
D.1.7 Intermediate/Final reports on artichoke and pomegranate biomass 1 AGROS R CO M22/48 
D.1.8 Intermediate/Final reports on cardoon biomass 1 DOP R CO M22/48 
D.2.1 Intermediate/Final reports on civil work at the polyphenols plant 2 ARRAM R CO 14/22 
D.2.2 Interm./Final reports on auxiliar services at the polyphenols plant 2 NATAC R CO 15/24 
D.2.3 Interm,/Final reports on processing plant at the polyphenols plant 2 NATAC R CO 16/26 
D.2.4 Intermediate/Final reports on civil work at the new triterpenic plant 2 ARRAM R CO 25/32 
D.2.5 Interm./Final reports on auxiliar services at the new triterpenic plant  2 NATAC R CO 26/34 
D.2.6 Interm./Final reports on processing plant at the new triterpenic plant  2 NATAC R CO 27/36 
D.2.7 Intermediate/Final reports on the design, deployment and validation 
of the monitoring system and control digital platform 2 IRIS R CO 36/54 
D.2.8 Intermediate/Final reports on Digitalization for Zero emission 2 NATAC R CO 36/52 
D.3.1 Report on olive VR-1 to VR-4 in operational environment TRL7 3 NATAC R CO 44 
D.3.2 Report on artichoke VR-5 to VR-7 in operational environment TRL7 3 NATAC R CO 38 
D.3.3 Report on pomegranate (VR-8) in operational environment TRL7 3 NATAC R CO 38 
D.3.4 Report on rosemary (VR-9 and 10) in operational environment TRL7 3 NATAC R CO 42 
D.3.5 Report on lemon verbena (VR-11) in operational environment TRL7 3 NATAC R CO 43 
D.3.6 Report on camomile (VR-12) in operational environment TRL7 3 NATAC R CO 46 
D.3.7 Complete qualification of the olive system (VR-1 to VR-4) TRL8 3 NATAC R CO 50 
D.3.8 Complete qualification of the artichoke system (VR-5 to VR-7) 3 NATAC R CO 46 
D.3.9 Complete qualification of the pomegranate system (VR-8) 3 NATAC R CO 44 
D.3.10 Complete qualification of the rosemary system (VR-9 and 10) 3 NATAC R CO 52 
D.3.11 Complete qualification of the lemon verbena system (VR-11) 3 NATAC R CO 50 
D.3.12 Complete qualification of the camomile system (VR-12) 3 NATAC R CO 52 
D.3.13 Report on replicability of DYANA biorefinery 3 NATAC R CO 52 
D.4.1 Catalogue of relevant product candidates ranked by suitability as 
food supplements. 4 NUT R CO 12 
D.4.2 Intermediate/final report on the development of food supplements 
resulting from the biorefinery’s VRs. 4 NUT R CO 24/51 
D.4.3 Report on the development of a camomile-based functional infusion 4 STAR R CO 48 
 
 
 Page 64 of 70 
D.4.4 Report on the application of antimicrobial and antioxidant 
ingredients in two different foods applications 4 STAR R CO 52 
D4.5 Intermediate/final report on the development of new food 
ingredients using fibre from exhausted biomass. 4 AGROS R CO 20/50 
D4.6 Intermediate/final report on the development of pet formulations 
and product registration.  4 ACEL R CO 24/51 
D4.7 In vivo evaluation of the gastrointestinal-health properties of the 
formulations developed for pets.   4 UNITO R CO 48 
D4.8 Intermediate/final report on the development of product 
formulations for feed additive applications.  4 MIAVIT R CO 20/50 
D4.9 Interm./final report on the development of bio-based fertilizers  4 BIOM R CO 22/52 
D4.10 Interm./final report on the produced cosmetic formulations and 
biological assays.  4 MBL R CO 24/51 
D5.1 Intermediate/Final report on Life Cycle Cost Assessment (LCCA) 5 ECO R CO 30/48 
D5.2 Intermediate/Final report on Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) 5 ECO R CO 40/54 
D5.3 Intermediate/Final report on Social Life Cycle Assessment (S-LCA) 5 ECO R CO 32/48 
D5.4 Intermediate/Final report on Circularity assessment 5 ECO R CO 34/50 
D5.5 Intermediate/Final report on regulatory compliance 5 ECO R CO 36/54 
D6.1 Development of visual identity and website 6 BIOPLAT R PU 3 
D6.2 Initial/Intermediate Communication and dissemination plan 6 BIOPLAT R CO 6/24 
D6.3 Data management plan 6 BIOPLAT R CO 6 
D6.4 Introductory and Conceptual video SUSTAINEXT project 6 BIOPLAT DEC PU 15 
D6.5 Scientific-Technical & Industrial/Guidance video 6 BIOPLAT DEC PU 54 
D6.6 Dissemination and Communication activities  6 BIOPLAT R CO 54 
D6.7 Multi-actor approach plan 6 BIOPLAT R CO 8 
D6.8 Intermediate/Final market reports 6 NATAC R CO 12/42 
D6.9 Intermediate/Final business models 6 NATAC R CO 20/50 
D6.10 Intermediate/Final Business & Exploitation plan 6 NATAC R CO 24/54 
D7.1 Ethical issues  7 NATAC R CO 6 
D7.2 Risk management plan  7 NATAC R CO 10/40 
 
3.1.6. List of milestones (3.1d) 
 
Nº Milestone Name Related 
WP 
Due date 
(months) Means of verifications 
M1 Earthwork Licensing ready 2 4 License issued by the townhall 
M2 Three MAP crops initiated 1 9 First samples collected 
M3 
First multi-actor (year 1 and year 2) approach 
materiality assessment completed and 
prioritized with stakeholders.  
6 24 D6.5 
M4 Polyphenol unit ready to start up 2 26 D2.3 
M5 Triterpenoid unit ready to start up 2 36 D2.6 
M6 176 Ton of all 6 pre-treated feedstocks 
available for TRL 7 validation 1 & 3 24 Feedstocks received at NATAC  
M7 Flagship design and construction complies 
with zero emissions and pollution ambition 5 40 D5.2 
M8 DYANA dynamic analysis algorithm first 
prototype developed and running. 2 42 First results obtained and analysed. 
M9 VRs completed at TRL 7 3 46 D3.1 - D3.6 Submitted, and samples 
analysed 
M10 318 Ton of all 6 pre-treated feedstocks 
available for TRL 8 validation 1 & 3 46 Feedstocks received at NATAC  
M11 VRs completed at TRL 8 3 52 D3.7 - D3.12 Submitted, and samples 
analysed 
M12 Ready-to-market end users’ products and 
formulations. 4 52 Products produced in T4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 
4.4, 4.5 and 4.6. 
M13 LCA completed for 12 VR and 46 Products 5 54 D5.2 
M14 Flagship completed and ready to operate. All 54 Final event in the plant. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Page 65 of 70 
3.1.7. Critical risks (3.1e) 
Risk management will be performed during the whole project by the SC and PC. Any risk s identified at any of the 
project levels (task, WP) will be identified and raised to the WP 
leader. Table 3.1e summarizes the preliminary risks identified 
during proposal preparation. Risks have been ranked using an 
impact - probability matrix (Fig. 3.3) and classified accordingly. 
In order to reduce risks likelihood, mitigation measures have 
already been defined. In parallel, a set of contingency plans to 
reduce the impact of potential risks have also been specified. 
Any additional risk not fo reseen in the proposal will be managed 
according to the next procedure: 
1. Risk identification, registration and communication to WP leader and PC and discussed at WP level and 
analysis of potential impact and contingency plan. 
2. If risk affects more than one W P or solution at WP level is not effective, risk will be raised to the SC and 
scheduled for analysis. Extraordinary SC will be called in case of necessity. 
3. Risk will be considered at a holistic way and will follow a full analysis plan: i) Risk identificati on, ii) impact 
extent analysis, iii) contingency measure formulation and analysis, iv) selection and implementation of 
response, v) follow up and evaluation, vi) monitoring and report. 
 
Table 3.1.e Preliminary risks identified in SUSTAINEXT and proposed mitigation measures 
WP Description of the Risk 
Mitigation measures (MM) & contingency plans (CP) 
Risk before 
mitigation 
Risk after 
mitigation 
Probability (P); Impact (I) 
Related with the technical challenge 
1 
Feedstock supply MAPs crops yield less than expected (meteorological reasons, plagues, etc.)  MEDIUM 
P: Medium 
I: Medium 
LOW 
P: Medium 
I: Low 
MM: MAPs are cultivated in different places by different feedstocks suppliers, minimizing 
stock-outs CP: Scaling up order will be adapted to feedstock availability. Ultimately, 
feedstocks will be acquired from a different supplier.  
2 
Delays in material supply for flagship construction due to war/geopolitical issues MEDIUM 
P: Medium 
I: Very high 
LOW 
P: Low 
I: Medium 
MM: EU products and materials will be favoured. Natac has already identified more than one 
supplier for some equipment pieces CP: New suppliers will be contacted; work Gantt will be 
adapted to material availability. 
2 
Delays in building licences MEDIUM 
P: Medium 
I: Medium 
LOW 
P: Very low 
I: Medium 
MM: Licences application will be done at the very beginning of the project. Moreover, the 
project has a strong support from local and regional authorities to foster administrative 
issues. CP: Work will be done in stages according to obtained licenses (earthworks first, etc.) 
2 
Lack of experience in huge engineering projects   
MEDIUM 
P: Low 
I: High 
 
LOW 
P: Very low 
I: Low 
MM: Natac with ARRAM (partner in SUSTAINEXT) led the construction of the previous factory 
during 2020, facing all pandemic issues and no mayor deviations occurred. CP: Additional 
experienced engineers will be hired if needed. 
2 
New equipment’s performance is worse than expected.   
MEDIUM 
P: Low 
I: High 
 
LOW 
P: Very low 
I: Low 
MM: The engineering company is within the consortium and will allow to design hand by 
hand with coordinator. Performance monitoring controls will be done during equipment 
manufacturing before installation in the plant CP: Potential deviations will be analysed , and 
corrective measures applied.   
2 
Real time sensors performance lower than expected  
MEDIUM 
P: Medium 
I: High 
 
LOW 
P: Low 
I: Medium 
MM. IRIS has large experience and has developed this technology in previous demo projects. 
CP. Alternative fast analytical methodologies will be developed (UPLC, etc.) to minimize 
impact. 
3 
Valorisation routes  industrialization process shows lower yield. Some products are not 
obtained according to initial plan.  
MEDIUM 
P: Low 
I: High 
 
LOW 
P: Low 
I: Low 
MM: Processes have been already scaled to TRL 6-7. Natac has extensive experience. Scaling 
up will start at M18, to have buffer time to correct deviations CP: Alternative process 
flowcharts or technologies (new flagship will have multiple options) will be used.  
3 
Ingredients with bad behaviour  in product development by end users (technological, 
rheological, efficacy, etc.)  
 
MEDIUM 
P: Medium 
I: Medium 
 
LOW 
P: Low 
I: Low 
MM: 46 different ingredients as alternatives. CP: Production process can be modified to fit 
with end users demands. 
Market uptake 
6 Regulatory aspects hindering market uptake (novel food, etc.)   
Figure 3.3 Impact - probability matrix. 

 
 
 Page 66 of 70 
MM. Preliminary regulatory watch with no objections. Used feedstocks are well known and 
accepted in Eur . CP: Alternative products can be used. Ultimately, approval application will 
be evaluated. 
MEDIUM 
P: Low 
I: Medium 
LOW 
P: Low 
I: Low 
6 
Market demands for certain ingredients/feedstock changes (reputation, fashion, etc.) MEDIUM 
P: Medium 
I: High 
LOW 
P: Low 
I: Low 
MM 46 alternative ingredients from 6 feedstocks.  CP. DYANA model is versatile and can be 
applied to additional feedstocks meeting market demands.  
Related with overall project management 
7 
Local community is reluctant towards flagship deployment  
MEDIUM 
P: Medium 
I: High 
 
LOW 
P: Low 
I: Low 
MM. D&C and engagement actions have been foreseen to enhance public acceptance. Natac 
has already shown the positive impact (job creation) in the area.  CP. Further activities will be 
developed.  
All 
Partner suspension/withdrawal  
MEDIUM 
P: Very low 
I: High 
 
LOW 
P: Very low 
I: Low 
MM: The consortium has been built with high ly qualified and committed partners (already 
demonstrated during proposal preparation). CP: Reorganization of tasks. Find a replacement 
to fulfil the pending tasks if required. 
All  
Partners/results underperformance MEDIUM 
P: Very low 
I: High 
LOW 
P: Very low 
I: Low 
MM: The Consortium agreement will provide an initial guideline, together with the conflict 
resolution guideline if needed. CP: The project Coordinator and Steering committee will 
analyse the project process and look for alternatives within the consortium. 
All  
Pandemic lockdown HIGH 
P: Medium 
I: Very 
High 
MEDIUM 
P: Medium 
I: Medium 
MM: COVID 19 pandemic follow up will be done since the beginning of the project to react 
ASAP.  CP: WP meetings, SC, GA, will be held by videoconference. In case of lockdown, desk 
work will be prioritized over lab. D&C actions will be maximized in digital for ms. In case of 
extreme necessity, force major measures will be applied in coordination with PO and EC.  
 
3.1.8. Staff effort (3.1f) 
WP NATAC  INNO AGROS TABEX CTAEX ECO BIOP ENEL 
IT 
ENEL 
ES ARRAM STAR INP ACEL UNITO BIOM DOP MIAVIT NUT FUNCYT IRIS MBL Total 
PM 
1 48 14 28 32 52     17 6     46     3 22           268 
2 380                 36                   23   439 
3 484       5                                 489 
4 48   19               36   41 26 48   34 32     36 320 
5 96 1 1 1 1 42 1 1 1 7 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 3 1 165 
6 108 1 1 1 1 1 36 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 17 1 1 179 
7 192 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 10 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 240 
Total 
PM 1356 18 51 36 61 45 39 21 10 54 40 50 45 30 55 26 38 36 20 29 40 2100 
 
 
 
3.1.9. Subcontracting (3.1g) 
6.ECO 
 Cost (€) Description of tasks and justification 
Subcontracting  7,000 External LCA verification by third party verifier  
11.STAR 
 Cost (€) Description of tasks and justification 
Subcontracting  15,000 Sensorial profile, triangle, and preference test analyses 
15.BIOM 
 Cost (€) Description of tasks and justification 
Subcontracting  15,000 Spanish Research Center (CEBAS-CSIC) to carry out different formulation tests using the 
selected sidestreams and additives (analysis of raw materials, formulation of the final 
product and the characterization of bio-based fertilisers products); other specialised 
Center to carry out field trials in the selected MAPs crops. 
 
3.1.10. ‘Purchase costs’ items (travel and subsistence, equipment and other goods, works and services (3.1h) 
 
1. NATAC Cost (€) Justification 
Travel and Subsistence 166,000 
10 Project Consortium Meetings, 4 people per meeting, 1,000 €/pax (40,000); Trade fairs 
12; 1500/pax x 2pax (36,000 €); D&C visits 10/year/1 pax/1000€ (50,000); technical 
meeting partners 20*1,000 €/pax x 2 pax (40,000) 
Equipment 3,258,800 
Depreciation costs: Civil work (178,500), boiler (350,000), clean room (80,325), reverse 
osmosis (120,000), solar panels (5 5,200), current production plant 
(373,275),chromatography (70,000), desolventization unit (112,000), micronization 
extraction (406,000), polyphenol purification unit (255,500), triterpenoid isolation unit 
(1,288,000) 
 
 
 Page 67 of 70 
Other Goods and Services 2,295,000 
Design, construction, installation, start up and qualification of newly design units 
(2,015,000); marketing, D&C, tradeshow exhibition, stakeholder events, multi -actor 
approach, local engagement (280,000). 
<15% of pers. Costs 910,000 
TOTAL 6,629,800 
3.AGROS Cost (€) Justification 
Travel and Subsistence 10,000  10 Project Consortium Meetings, 1 Person per meeting) (10,000). 
Equipment 730,000 
Depreciation costs: lab equipment (NIR, colorimeter, spectrophotometer) and other lab 
equipment (124,250) Dryer and miller pilot plant (26,000); depreciation costs industrial 
manufacturing: dryer (93,750), enzymatic treatment plant (450,000), micronization miller 
(36,000) 
Other Goods and Services 69,000 Feedstock, lab analysis and lab fungible (69,000) 
<15% of pers. Costs 4,000 
TOTAL 813,000 
4. TABEX Cost (€) Justification 
Travel and Subsistence 20,000 10 Project Consortium Meetings, 2 people per meeting) (20,000). 
Other Goods and Services 38,000 Agricultural materials (seeds, fertilizers, pesticides, substrate, etc.) (10,000) Agricultural 
supplies (irrigation material) (8,000). Harvesting costs (20,000) 
<15% of pers. Costs 8,000 
TOTAL 66,000 
5. CTAEX Cost (€) Justification 
Travel and Subsistence 20,000 10 Project Consortium Meetings, 2 people per meeting) (20,000). 
Other Goods and Services 55,000 Agricultural materials (Substrates and pots) (20,000). Agricultural services (Preparation of 
rosemary vegetable material and its harvesting) (35,000). 
<15% of pers. Costs 5,420 
TOTAL 80,420 
7. BIOPLAT Cost (€) Justification 
Travel and Subsistence 17800 8 Project Consortium Meetings, 2 people per meeting + final meeting in Spain (17,800). 
Other Goods and Services 42000 Website (7,000), Videos (30,000), e-newsletters (1,000), Stakeholders workshop (4,000) 
<15% of pers. Costs 16,700 
TOTAL 76,500 
8. ENEL IT Cost (€) Justification 
Travel and Subsistence 20,000 10 Project Consortium Meetings, 2 people per meeting) (20,000). 
<15% of pers. Costs 2,500 
TOTAL 22,500 
9. ENEL ES Cost (€) Justification 
Other Goods and Services 98,500 
Implementation and maintenance of the agriphotovoltaic  solution, (39,500), sensors 
(25,000), engineering and installation of agricultural and energy sensors (15,000), 
dataloggers, communication systems, etc, Shipping costs of harvested crops (19,000) 
TOTAL 98,500 
11. STAR Cost (€) Justification 
Travel and Subsistence 20,000 10 Project Consortium Meetings, 2 people per meeting) (20,000). 
Equipment 27,500 Depreciation costs: pilot plants (12,500), Analytical equipment to check product features 
and shelf life (15,000) 
Other Goods and Services 40,000 Lab and Fungible, solvents, reactives, chromatography, standards, raw material for pilot 
trials (15,000), market research and communication consulting agency (25,000). 
<15% of pers. Costs 4,000 
TOTAL 91,500 
12. INP Cost (€) Justification 
Travel and Subsistence 20,000 10 Project Consortium Meetings, 2 people per meeting) (20,000). 
Equipment 70,000 Depreciation costs: harvest machine (55,000), seeding machine (12,000) Containers 
(3,000) 
<15% of pers. Costs 7,000 
TOTAL 97,000 
13. ACEL Cost (€) Justification 
Travel and Subsistence 10,000 10 Project Consortium Meetings, 1 person per meeting (10,000) 
Equipment 15,000 Depreciation costs: pilot plant (8,000), equipments (HPLC, NIR) (7,000). 
<15% of pers. Costs 12,000 
TOTAL 37,000 
14. UNITO Cost (€) Justification 
Travel and Subsistence 18,000 10 Project Consortium Meetings, 1/2 people per meeting) (18,000). 
Equipment 7,000 Depreciation costs storage unit (7,000) 
Other Goods and Services 40,000 Lab reagents for in vivo trials; consumables and reagents for hematochemical evaluations; 
microbiota Illumina experiment; faecal analysis (40,000) 
 
 
 Page 68 of 70 
<15% of pers. Costs 20,000 
TOTAL 85,000 
15. BIOM Cost (€) Justification 
Travel and Subsistence 20,000 10 Project Consortium Meetings, 2 people per meeting) (20,000) 
<15% of pers. Costs 25,000 
TOTAL 45,000 
16. DOP Cost (€) Justification 
Travel and Subsistence 20,000 10 Project Consortium Meetings, 2 people per meeting) (20,000) 
Other Goods and Services 33,000 
Agricultural services (Management of thistle cultivation and its harvesting) (25,000). 
Transport of thistle vegetal material (7,000). Marketing and communication material 
(notice board, pamphlets, flyers, etc.) (1,000) 
<15% of pers. Costs 15,000 
TOTAL 68,000 
17. MIAVIT Cost (€) Justification 
Travel and Subsistence 20,000 10 Project Consortium Meetings, 2 people per meeting) (20,000) 
Equipment 25,000 Rancimat, Oxipres (RapiOxi) depreciation (12,000) & HPLC equipment depreciation costs 
(2,000)+ others CRD FOODLAB  (11,000) 
Other Goods and Services 60,000 External trials with independant institutions in trial farms or in vitro trials (60,000) 
<15% of pers. Costs 10,000 
TOTAL 115,000 
18. NUT Cost (€) Justification 
Travel and Subsistence 20,000 10 Project Consortium Meetings, 2 people per meeting) (20,000) 
Equipment 45,000 Depreciation costs: Balances, Climatic chambers, Interchangeable Barrel Mixer: 
Equipment for mixing ingredients and making prototypes capsule packaging machine 
Other Goods and Services 115,000 
Lab & fungible, solvents, reactive (70,000), initial training on reporting (6,000), templates 
and project management tools (6,000), support on financial issues related to reporting 
(9,000), legal support incl. review of contracts with project partners, preparation of GA 
amendments if needed, etc (17,000), audit certificate (7000) 
<15% of pers. Costs 23,500 
TOTAL 203,500 
19. FUNCYT Cost (€) Justification 
Travel and Subsistence 20,000 10 Project Consortium Meetings, 2 people per meeting) (20,000) 
<15% of pers. Costs 7,500 
TOTAL 27,500 
20. IRIS Cost (€) Justification 
Travel and Subsistence 10,000 10 Project Consortium Meetings, 1 people per meeting) (10,000) 
Other Goods and Services 87,000 
Materials for building the monitoring system prototypes (60,000), IT Servers for hosting 
and deployment digital system, screen, Process Unit Industrial PC for Data Management 
and other components for each monitoring prototype (20,000) - Certifications, safety and 
trainings (7,000)  
<15% of pers. Costs 16,000 
TOTAL 113,000 
 
Total IKOP contribution from all the partners in the project is  8,410,179 €, which represents a 37.53% of the total 
budget.  
IKOP contribution from BIC members is 7,284,016 €, which represents a 32.51 % of the 
total budget. 
Mibelle participates in the consortium as “ Associated partner”. Swiss participants are not funded by the EC, so its 
budget is not included in requested funding in the budget table (PART A of the proposal). Based on the guidelines, 
the total costs estimated for Mibelle has been included as a “financial contribution” of an “associated partner”. Below 
is a table showing the specific costs for Mibelle:  
 
 
 
BUDGET-MIBELLE AG (Associated partner) 
Personnel costs/€ 240,000 
Purchase costs-Travel and substistence/€ 20,000 
Purchase costs-Equipment/€ 45,000 
Purchase costs-Other goods, works and services/€ 50,000 
Indirect costs/€ 88,750 
Total costs/€ 443,750 
 
 
 
 Page 69 of 70 
3.2. Capacity of participants and consortium as a whole.  
The SUSTAINEXT consortium is composed of 21 partners: 5 RTOs, 13 
SMEs and 3 LEs (2 Affiliated entities, 1 Associated partner) , from 5 
countries throughout Europe (Spain, Italy, Germany, Austria and 
Switzerland) (Fig 3. 4). To meet the objectives of SUSTAINEXT 
described in Section 1.1.2, a skilled and competent consortium that 
covers the whole value chain was composed, from the fields to the 
market, including partners with the necessary technical and scientific 
know-how to develop disruptive and innovative tech nologies and 
make the DYANA model reality. The partners of SUSTAINEXT cover a 
wide area of scientific knowledge and industrial experience in 6 
essential fields, and their joint capacities and expertise unify all the 
necessary disciplinary and inter-disciplinary knowledge: 
 
i) Sustainably-sources feedstocks. INNO is a JV between NATAC and 
Oleicola El Tejar, the biggest olive cooperative in the world. INNO has 
an ample experience in sustainably provisioning ol ive leaves, 
OMWW and olive fruit skin, and the capacity and knowledge to apply 
the individual pre -treatments to these feedstocks to improve their 
quality and reach high FSIs. AGROS is a biomass operator that has an 
extensive contact network with various ag ri-food companies in the 
south of Spain and the capacity and technical knowledge to provide 
a sustainable supply of both artichoke and pomegranate, as well as 
the necessary infrastructure to perform the specific pre -treatments 
to improve the FSI. DOP is a strategic partner with a high interest in 
the standardization of cardoon flower cultivation and its respective 
industrialization, making DOP the partner associated with its stable supply. All partners have at their disposal the 
required infrastructures to provide and maintain a steady agro -industrial feedstocks supply, achieve their 
stabilization and apply the established pre-treatments as necessary.  
Considering the cultivated crops, ENEL is the partner most qualified to successfully manage the agrivoltaic cultivation 
in a sustainable manner. They have at their disposal great photovoltaic parks in Extremadura where they have 
successfully cultivated rosemary. TABEX needs to find alternative for tobacco cultivation, and has already 
participated in the cultivation of camomile, lemon verbena and Rosemary with CTAEX and NATAC, guaranteeing the 
favourable outcome for the planned activities. INP, a company affiliated with STAR, has successfully cultivated 4 Ha 
of camomile last year, making them the best partner to perform this task. All partners have available the adequate 
cultivation area and equipment to complete the agricultural activities.    
 
ii) Technology providers: Considering the construction of the biorefinery, ARRAM is the most skilled partner for this 
task as they were already been involved in the construction of the current production plant in Hervás, know the 
environment of the region, the required suppliers and public administration. ARRAM definitely has the technological 
capability to resolve all challenges that the construction of DYANA can impose.  IRIS is an advanced engineering 
company centered on industrial digital transformation, expert for developing real time monitorization systems. They 
have already developed the sensor technologies that will be required in SUSTAINEXT to TRL 6 and have experience 
coordinating the project AGRIMAX, which makes their contribution of great importance. As coordinators, NATAC will 
be in charge of open science practices. 
 
iii) Technologies and disruptive processes to obtain high added-value products: As coordinators and constructors of 
the biorefinery, NATAC will bring the highest technological contribution in SUSTAINEXT. NATAC has developed the 
12 valorisation routes to ob tain46 plant -based healthy extracts at TRL -6 and the disruptive model of dynamic 
analysis. Additionally, NATAC has accredited experience in constructing industrial extraction plants. 
 
iv) End users: SUSTAINEXT will target 6 markets for the placement of 64 obtained extracts and plant -derived 
products. For each of the markets, SUSTAINEXT can count on a partner specialized in the development of tailored 
products for their market of operation. a) NUT is a technological company with extensive experience in developing 
formulations for food supplements. NUT is a service provider to a wide range of food supplement companies, making 
their role with a multiplying effect. b) STAR is a big company with a high interest in developing various food matrices 
for the incorporation of the plant -based products of SUSTAINEXT that will have a great impact and acceptance. 
AGROS is specialized in the production of fibre through enzymatic treatments and will develop PFF fibre products 
Figure 3.4. Map of the SUSTAINEXT's consortium 
 
 
 Page 70 of 70 
from various side streams of the VRs. c) MIB is a big company from Switzerland with bread experience in the 
development of ingredients for the cosmetics market, and has a wide knowledge of the cosmetics market and 
technological know-how to multiply the value of the ingredients that will be obtained in DYANA; d) ACEL is a company 
specialized in the development of healthy products for dogs and cats, a great knowledge of their market and the 
technological processes to undergo to bring to market the innovative pr oducts of  DYANA. Moreover, it is 
accompanied by UNITO for this area of activity, an RTO responsible for performing the required activity studies 
previous to the market debut. e) MIAVIT is one of the leading companies in the market of feed additives for far m 
animals. Considering that MIAVIT commercializes additives that are incorporated in animal feed, MIAVIT is a supplier 
to hundreds of feed producers, multiplying the diffusion of the products t hat will be obtained in DYANA. f) Finally, 
BIOM is an expert in fabricating bio-based fertilizers with a broad experience in fertilizer formulations by combining 
various feedstocks and developing products adapted to the cultivation necessities of the SUSTAINEXT crops. All end 
users of SUSTAINEXT have at their disposal the required infrastructure to carry out the work assigned to them.  
 
v) Towards zero-emissions: ECO is a company with high experience in life cycle analyses, essential to guarantee the 
success of the project SUSTAINEXT. It can coun t of extensive background in th is type of projects and have already 
provided these services to many other leading companies in the industrial sector.  
 
vii) Social awareness and multi-actor approach: FUNCYT will be in-charge of implementing the multi-actor approach 
at regional level in Extremadura, and BIOPLAT will be responsible of effectuating the D&C activities and  the multi-
actor a pproach a t global level. Both will integrate social sciences in the project as the base for multi -actor 
engagement. FUNCYT and BIOPLAT will give visibility to the gender dimension for the social relevance and quality of 
research and innovation activities.  
 
Conflict resolution: In order to solve the troubles/conflicts that could compromise the success of the project the 
following steps will be taken:  
1. First, the trouble will be discussed at the WP level and an attempt will be made to arrive at a solution with 
the mediation of the Coordinator. 
2. In case of lack of solution, the problem will be raised at the Steerin g Committee level and a second attempt 
will be made to look for a solution.  
3. If the issue still persists, it will be discussed at General Assembly. 
Lastly, if none of the above is enough, the PC will discuss the problem with the Project Officer and the funding organ 
and an attempt will be made to reach a solution. 
Along this process, the PC will consult all available tools, like the Finance, IPR and Ethics helpdesks. 
 
Advisory Board: The consortium members will set up an Advisory Board for SUSTAINEXT at the beginning of the 
project (first 6 months). The main function of the Advisory Board will be to mobilise knowledge and to strengthen 
the Consortium’s capacity in reaching out to the stakeholders at the EU level and globally.  
Outstanding professionals in the field of biomass, circularity and bioeconomy, with wide experience in industrial or 
scientific-technical fields, will be part of it. A key mission of the Board will be to provide a dditional knowledge, 
perspectives and recommendations with regards to innovative biorefinery technologies and processes, potential 
uses of biobased products and social/environmental aspects. Accordingly, the experts will represent i) industries that 
could provide technologies or be potential users, ii) financiers iii) high -level stakeholders from Europe, who are 
potentially interested in establishing a working relationship with SUSTAINEXT, and iv) experts with a background in 
thermo-chemical biomass technologies and biomass feedstocks.  
Advisory Board Members candidates have been already identified from entities sending LoIs (CREA IT, CIEMAT, 
INVEREADY)  and will be invited -at least- to one project meeting per year. They will have the right to participate in 
the project final conference, as well as to comment and evaluate project deliverables and help the development of 
Comm&Diss and exploitation strategies. 
 
 
SUSTAINEX will make a revolutionary step forward in transforming the European bio-based 
sector into a modern, digital, sustainable, and highly competitive industry. SUSTAINEXT 
feasibility is strongly supported by a highly competent consortium and a high ex perienced 
financially sound coordinator. SUSTAINEXT will definitively contribute to achieve a carbon-
neutral Europe by 2050 and generate a high economic impact, while having a decisive 
socioeconomic impact in a humble rural region such as Extremadura.