2.1 Project’s pathways towards impact  
 
45 Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development  
HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-38         Innovation Action – THESEUS H4C  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6560347 - 17/09/2024 
Page 28 of 41  
Waste management remains one of the most serious environmental issues in Attica holding back transition to 
circular economy with main figures for municipal solid waste indicated in section 1. Theseus impact within its 
symbiotic material flows is presented through the lens of regional (Attica) and national (Greece) targets to be 
reached by 2030 as defined in Regional Solid Waste Management Plan (SWMP)4647 and Regional Plan for Climate 
Change Adaptation.  
A. Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) includes the summary of all 
waste from channels (mainly from trash bins) within city and 
from industrial (only) packaging wastes. In Greece, the 
municipal solid waste composition (%) is as follows: paper 
28.5, biowaste (organic waste) 39.2, plastic 11.8, metal  
(Fe) 2.2, metal (Al) 0.9, glass 4.1, textiles 2, wood 3.6, bulky 
waste 2, waste   
electrical and electronic equipment 2, small quantities of 
hazardous waste 0.1, rest 3.6. The special channel of Table 1. 
Attica MSW blue bins (WA TT) collects recyclable packaging from citizens, but their misuse results often that their  
composition is similar to that of common bins, thus Theseus activities can potentially be expanded to all MSWs. 
Textiles are also included in MSW, collected by dedicated channels ( purple Bins by RECYCOM) or disposed in 
blue or common bins. Thus, both Pilots #1 and #2 concern MSW.  For the 2 pilots:   
A1. Pilot #2:  main source is blue bins specialized in packaging including plastic packaging and addressing also 
biobased  
Packaging: blue bins are designed for packaging collection (collected 81.351tn in Attica 2019). Packaging 
has overall recycling targets 
  70%w/w by 2030, including i) Plastics:  blue bins & MSW with target 
  48% 
by 2030, ii) Paper: blue bins & MSW 
  85% by 2030 iii) Biobased (organic material): accidently in blue 
bins & 39,2% of MSW
  -35% landfill disposal by 2030. A2. Pilot #1:  main source is Textiles from Purple 
Bins (more than 2.500 “purple bins” all over Greece, RECYCOM managed more than 18.500 tons of clothes 
since 2012 and 4.865 tons in Athens in 2023). Textiles refer to 11,8% of USW with projections 
  collect 
27.778 tn from special points common bins and recover 14.958tn by 2030 from common bins by 2030.  
B. CDW: 997.742 tons were collected in 2019, and projected value for 2030 is 2.158.177 tn. Recycling/reuse rate 
is currently estimated to be around 30-35%.  For B1. Pilot #3:  main source is CDW and metals from and glass 
bottles, thus impact can potentially affect glass and metals flows in the above streams as well: Glass: 3,1% of 
MSW & 30% of blue bins 
  target: 75% by 2030, Metals: 4,1% of MSW &  
20% of blue bins 
  target: 70% by 2030. 
Theseus Contribution  
Theseus contribution to the to the above targets is summarized in terms of waste diverted from landfill and GHG 
emission reduction.  
Table 1 estimated saved GHG emissions  
MSW: Blue bins collected 81351tn of waste in 
Attica in 2019. Theseus will increase the accuracy 
of separation leading to better upcycling and 
valorization. Theseus sorter will be capable to 
recover plastics, metal, paper, textiles as well as 
biowaste from urban waste. Cu rrently 50 % of 
materials is upcycled by WA TT while the Theseus 
target is to reach 70 % (and consequently meet the 
regional target), therefore contributing to 16270 t/yr 
diverted from landfills (11063,6 tCO 2e). The 
following composition of packaging waste is 
assumed, based on the report of Hellenic Recovery 
Recycling Corporation56: paper (all types) 45%, glass 13%, plastic 25%, metals 9,5%, wood 8%. In middle and 
long term, through social activities and education focusing on correct recycling at a source, increasing the 
predictability of the materials inside the blue bins it is likely, that the input can be increased up to +40%, given that 
 
46 https://www.edsna.gr/s-m-p-e-3is-anatheorisis-pesda/ (Last updated in June 2022)  
47 Preparation of recycle and recovery defined in https://www.edsna.gr/s-m-p-e-3is-anatheorisis-pesda/ (Last updated in June 2022)  
48 Emission Factors for Greenhouse Gas Inventories (epa.gov)  factors for Mixed recyclables, textiles carpets and different CDW materials were used to calculate estimation 56 
Έκθεση του Συστήματος Συλλογής Εναλλακτικής Διαχείρισης – Ανακύκλωση (herrco.gr)  
Year  2019  2030  
Total  2.198.746 tn  Est. 2.068.810 
tn  
Landfill  1.707.233 tn -
77,7%  
268.810 
tn -  
10%   
Recycling 
rate54  
272.112 tn - 
12,4%  
1.277.770 
tn - 
 65% 
Flow  
waste diverted 
from landfill  
(tons/yr)  
tons CO2e/ 
yr55  
Recyclable materials, 
Blue  
Bin short term (long -
term)  
16.270 (38670)  11.063,6 
(26295,6)  
Textiles  7.784  155,68  
CDW  20.055  401,1  
Total  44.109 (66509)  11.620 (26852)  
HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-38         Innovation Action – THESEUS H4C  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6560347 - 17/09/2024 
Page 29 of 41  
plastics and paper are the 40,3% (thus 833.730 tn by 2030) of MSW and 45% of total packaging waste, therefore 
32.000 tn. Recycled by 70% could result in extra recycled 22400 tn/year, thus 38670 tn/yr (26295,6 tCO2e). disposal 
saving than current. Also, biobased (organic materials) are a huge part consisting 39,2% of MSW and often 
accidentally or attached to packaging end up in blue bins. Theseus will contribute to its detection and upcycling in 
packaging materials.   
Textiles Immediate impact in RECYCOM facilities with Theseus interventions is that 50% of the existing sorting 
line will be automated. The  
  
automated part of the line is estimated to exhibit roughly 30% increase in capacity compared to the previous manual 
processing (approx. 3162 tn per year compared to the current 2432 t) thus 730 tn per year (15 % increase in total).  
In middle and long term , Theseus will propose a shift, in how textiles are handled and contributing to a national 
textile management system, that could potentially handle all the textiles collected yearly in Attica with projections 
for 2030 being (27.778 tn from special points a nd14.958 tn common bins) namely around 42.500 tn/yr. After the 
end of the project and by 2030, RECYCOM could be fully automated increasing the textiles managed by total 30%, 
to extra 1460 tn/yr. At the same time, with an strategic increase of 100% to the p urple bins system capacity (or 
similar recycling establishments by region), along with training and social awareness raising, extra 6324 tn of 
textiles (15% of 42.500 tn that could end in landfill as there is no wide textile management system) could be 
collected, resulting to a total of 7784 tn/yr extra landfill savings (155,68 tCO2e) from current status.  
CDW (excavation not considered) 888270 tons were collected in 2019, and projected values for 2030 are 959606 
tn.   
Recycling/reuse rate is currently estimated to be around 33 -35%, therefore around 302, 000 tn are recycled right 
now49.  For CDW sorting Thesues will build on work performed within W2W project, where an adaptive system 
for wood and glass separation from CDW is developed. Having in mind, that Thesues will focus on adaptation of a 
well- optimized system for further separation of metals from CDW and that CDW is expected to be accepted from 
multiple sources, including renovation the target for the recycling rate after completion of  Theseus was set to 
ambitious 50 %. To increase the possibilities of achieving this goal Thesus will work with region of Attica towards 
optimized system for CDW management, including potential increase of the numbers of permission for SMEs 
dealing with CDW waste or consider moving the CDW management to neighboring regions. In typical CDW 
composition for Southern countries we encounter 11,28 % of metal 50 , resulting in (11,28% 100196 t of CDW 
collected in 2019, with 34067 t recycled. Managing to achieve target recycling rate for 2030: 50 % would result in 
54122 t/y recycled, and 20055 t/y diverted from landfill (401,1 tCO2e).  
Energy flow: Renewable energy sources account for 22,68% of total energy generation in 2022 in Greece and for 
30,61% of the total energy produced for heating and cooling needs compared to 23,03% and 24,81% in EU -27 
respectively for the same year51. The impact of Theseus in the energy flow will be multi-fold. Theseus will develop 
a pilot where an investment of 3.000.000 € in solar thermal technology and fuel cells will introduce more than an 
additional 3.000 MWh of clean energy into the district heat ing and cooling network in Greece, showcasing that 
RES energy for district heating and cooling (DHC) is not only an environmentally friendly, but a financially viable 
solution as well. Moreover, the potential for a bigger adoption of DHC systems in Greece and the world is huge. In 
2018, a little less than 6% of global heat consumption was supplied through DHC networks with fossil fuels 
dominating as the primary energy source of DHC due to the extensive use of natural gas in Russia and coal in China 
that combined account for 2% for the global DHC consumption. Energy demand met by DHC networks is projected 
to increase by +4% globally, whereas RES penetration into the DHC systems is expected to increase by 40% 52 
Therefore, Theseus could have a wider impact into the decarbonization of the heating demands on a global scale.  
The main stakeholders of the THESEUS are expected to belong to the following target groups: I) Industries, where 
Ia. associated with P4P partnership and Ib. non-P4P industries, II) Local communities-citizens, general public III) 
local and regional administration IV) Policy makers V) Partnerships, Associations, NGOs working with circularity, 
environment, human health, etc. VI) Scientific and academic community. THESEUS Key Exploitable Results 
(KER)  
KER   Focus  KER name  Value chain  Partner  Research 
output  
SO   Target  
 
49 https://www.edsna.gr/s-m-p-e-3is-anatheorisis-pesda/ (Last updated in June 2022)  
50 https://publications.jrc.ec.europa.eu/repository/handle/JRC130992   
51 Eurostat: https://doi.org/10.2908/NRG_IND_REN   
52 How can district heating help decarbonise the heat sector by 2024? – Analysis - IEA  
HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-38         Innovation Action – THESEUS H4C  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6560347 - 17/09/2024 
Page 30 of 41  
Innovation Pillar 1 COLLABORATION     
KER1  
Projects   
& sites  
  
Roadmap for collaboration 
(i)between sites  
(GR, SWE, NO) and ii) between Hub 
& CCRI  
& Replication Roadmap Tool  
All  CIRCE, TUC  Report, 
software  
5, 6   All   
KER2 Common hub circularity guidelines  All  A.SPIRE   Guidelines  All  All  
KER3  
Citizens  
AR for social awareness and 
acceptance  
All  ICCS  Report/Frame 
work  
6   All   
Innovation Pillar 2 SYMBIOTIC FLOWS (MA TERIALS)     
KER4   
 
Circular construction material  CDW,  
Textiles   
SINTEF/TUD   Circular 
product 
prototype   
2   I, VI   
 
KER5 Biobased thin films for packaging   MSW  NCSR   Prototype   2   I, VI   
KER6 Electrospinning for thin films   MSW  NTUA   Technology   2   I, VI   
KER7 Biological recycling & spinning for 
upcycling  
Textiles  CIRCE, HUD  Technologies  1, 2   ALL   
KER8 Upcycled packaging, masterbatches    MSW  HMU  Prototype   2   ALL   
KER  
9  
Strategic Master Plan on Circularity  All  NTUA, EYDAP  Framework  3  I, III,  
IV , VI  
Innovation Pillar 3 SYMBIOTIC FLOWS (WA TER/ENERGY)     
  
KER10  
  
Decentralized sewage mining and NBS 
for water reuse    
Water   EYDAP   Technology/Re 
port   
1, 3   I, II, III, 
VI  
KER11  Sewage sludge valorisation  Water   NTUA   Technological 
scheme   
3   I, III, 
IV ,VI 
KER 
12 
Centralized reclaimed water fertigation   Water  NTUA  Technological 
scheme  
3  I, II, IV , 
VI  
KER13  
 
H2 for production of heat and 
electricity through a  
CHP  
Energy/Water   CERTH   Technological 
scheme  
3  I,II, III, 
VI  
KER14  New generation of HVFP solar thermal 
technology for greening District heating 
and covering cooling loads of buildings  
Energy   CERTH, TVP,  
CLEAN  
Technological 
scheme   
  3  I, II, III, 
VI  
Innovation Pillar 4 DIGITALIZATION & ROBOTICS    
KER15  
 
Automated textiles separation system   textile   ICCS   Prototype, 
algorithms   
1, 2    I, V  
KER16  Automated sorting for mixed waste and 
plastics   
MSW  ICCS   Prototype, 
algorithms   
1,  2    I, V  
KER17  Industrial sorting systems: Glass/copper 
& metals sorting system  
CDW &  
Industrial  
ICCS  Prototype, 
algorithms   
1, 2   I, V  

HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-38         Innovation Action – THESEUS H4C  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6560347 - 17/09/2024 
Page 31 of 41  
KER 
18 
  
  
XR for human-robot 
interactions/collaboration  
MSW textiles  ICCS  Prototype, 
software  
1,2   I, VI  
KER19  Dynamic symbiotic maps, prediction 
models, DPPs and optimization for 
smart bins   
MSW  ICCS   Framework, 
prototype, 
algorithms, 
aggreg.data   
1,2,4    I, II, 
III,  
VI  
KER20  H4C Marketplace with advanced 
matchmaking features & secure data 
exchange   
All   IRIS/ICCS   Prototype   1, 4    I, III,  
VI   
KER 
21 
Models: i) WEF nexus, ii) Cities climate 
& impacts  
All   Imperial, NTUA  Algorithms, 
aggreg.data   
1, 4    I,  
III,VI   
Innovation Pillar 5 GOVERNANCE    
KER22  Recomme 
ndations  
Analysis of symbiotic flows in the context of 
EU and local regional plans. Regional and 
Intraregional development guidelines  
All  ICCS,  
UAGEAN,  
LiU  
 Report   1I, 
III,  
,IV , 
VI  
6 
KER23  Policy guidelines based on Material Flow 
Analysis, impact on the health and de-risking 
assessment  
All  LiU   Report   4IV  
KER24  Standards  Contributions to CEN and/or ISO standards   All  DS   Standards   1All  
, 
6 
2.1.1 Contribution of the project to the expected outcomes specified in the topic  
Expected Outcome 1: “… Demonstrate zero urban waste in a near commercial scale environment through 
systemic resource recovery as alternative material feedstock; a decrease of GHG emissions is also expected by 
explicitly addressing the reduced flow of goods (due to geographical proximity) ...”  
Pathway to impact: Resource recovery as material for feedstock is a critical aspect of THESEUS. THESEUS is 
addressing materials, water and energy flows. Management, processing and valorization of secondary resource 
streams will be improved. Implementation of automated sorting systems for different types of waste: MSW, used 
clothes, construction and demolition will lead to reduction of waste as after processing the waste will serve as 
feedstock for own or other industries. The resource recovery will be enhanced through systemi c approach to 
reduction of flow of goods. It will be an outcome of deploying diverse methods and addressing the issue from 
different perspectives. Material flow analysis with project until 2050 will be performed. Results of the study will 
be combined with the logistics aspect of the good transportation, and with analysis of regional and interregional 
pathways for symbiotic flows linked to EU and local regional plans. That impact of those activities will be 
intensified by digital technologies contributing to  reduction of flow of goods: GIS tool for dynamic symbiotic 
maps, matchmaking frameworks symbiotic models, DPPs, Material/Water financial and quantity quality 
prediction, water-energy-materials-waste nexus model as well as DPPs. All this will allow to opti mize existing 
and propose more efficient future symbiotic collaborations with reduced flow of goods. This approach will be 
complemented by social awareness increase activities (using engaging AR technology and educational activities). 
Furthermore, the reduction of the GHG emissions will be complemented by smart grids and sensors used identify 
waste heat sources, facilitating the recovery of this excess heat which becomes an alternative material feedstock 
for district heating systems, minimizing waste and re ducing the reliance on conventional energy sources. By 
prioritizing these  
sustainable sources, the system reduces reliance on fossil fuels feedstock, contributing to lower GHG emissions 
and enhancing resource efficiency.  

HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-38         Innovation Action – THESEUS H4C  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6560347 - 17/09/2024 
Page 32 of 41  
KERs: KER3-KER21, 22-24, Target Groups: Industries (I), local communities and administration (II, III), 
Partnerships, Associations,  
NGOs (V), scientific community (VI)   
Expected Outcomes KPIs and [Target]: KPI1.1 Number of closed loops [5]; KPI 1.2 Number of established cross-
sectoral collaborations within geographical proximity [min. 5]; KPI1.3 Increase in efficiency of flows sorting 
[97%]; KPI1.4 Number of DPPs for circular products [6]; KPI1.5 Number of models developed and validated 
for prediction: [min 3]  KPI 1.6 Cost reduction of transportation [min15 %]  KPI1.7 reduction in materials 
transported from other regions [min 15 %]  KPI1.8 Companies implementing upcycling processes and 
technologies: [min 10]   
Significance: Increase in the use of recovered resources: 
30%  
Scale: Reduction of GHG emissions by 26852 t 
CO2e/ yr  
Expected Outcome 2: “Reduce the freshwater consumption for urban green irrigation by 50 %, and re-use 90 % 
of the solid waste generated by the wastewater treatment”  
Pathway to impact: Technical and non-technical innovations will be used within the water use case to generate 
the impact through valorization of water flows and integration into circular – symbiotic value chains. Centralized 
and decentralized solutions wil l be implemented. for the purpose of decentralized water reuse sewer mining 
technology will be implemented making it possible to reuse water for irrigation. To increase the impact sewage 
mining implementation will be complemented by assessment of the techn ology in the context of regulatory 
requirements, its cost effectiveness and sustainability.  Implementation of NBS will contribute to water recovery 
and availability and to reduced flood risk, which is a serious problem in Attica region. Theseus will also take 
care of sludge from wastewater treatment plants and use technologies to transform it into hydrogen and biofuel. 
An important milestone of the pathway toward the impact will be the co-development of the Strategic Regional 
Master Plan for Circularity in  Attica, where the most important actors from public and industrial sectors will 
collaborate towards improved wastewater management and going beyond the technical aspect with business 
cases established and pricing proposals.  Within plan conclusions, lessons learner, challenges encountered during 
demonstration will be gathered in the context of future investments and present/upcoming regulations for circular 
water management for whole region.  
KERs: 9-12 Target Groups: ALL  
Expected Outcomes KPIs and [Target]:  KPI1.1 Min. number of actors collaborating towards Attica Reuse 
Masterplan  [min.10]; KPI1.3 Number of sites with sewage mining implemented [ min. 3 ]; KPI1.4 number of 
NBS implemented [min 2] KPI1.5 Increase in resuse of water for Irrigation of crops and urban area [20%] KPI1.6 
Rainfall runoff reduction [by 15%] decreasing flood risk in intervention areas; KPI1.7 Rainfall runoff peak 
discharge reduction [40%] decreasing flood risk in intervention areas  
Significance: Overall increase in 
water re-use by 50 %   
Scale: re-use 90 % of the solid waste generated by the wastewater 
treatment,  Reduction the freshwater consumption for urban green 
irrigation by 50 %  
Expected outcome 3: “Citizens living in cities will benefit from a healthier environment through industrial/urban 
symbiosis by lowering emissions through circular an renewable energy sources and waste reduction”  
Pathway to impact: The link between human health and clean environment has been well documented 53 54. In 
huge cities like Athens maintaining clean environment is however a big challenge. The implementation of Attica  
hub for circularity through industrial/urban symbiosis will introduce a number of actions, which directly and 
indirectly are linked to heal thier environment and therefore healthier  citizens. Through implementation of 
Theseus I-US it is expected that healthier environment will be achieved through i) reduction of waste generation 
ii) reduction of GHG and other emissions iii) lowering the amoun t of waste that needs to be landfilled iv) 
wastewater discharge will be reduced through water reuse activities, v) use of renewable energy sources, vi) 
improving air quality, vii) mitigating the climate change. In order to evaluate the actual effect, that the 
implementation of the hub will have on the health of its citizens, THESEUS will perform an assessment based 
 
53 https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpubh.2021.756652/full   
54 https://iris.who.int/bitstream/handle/10665/204585/9789241565196_eng.pdf?sequence=1   
HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-38         Innovation Action – THESEUS H4C  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6560347 - 17/09/2024 
Page 33 of 41  
on the framework proposed by WHO on health benefits in the context of transition to circular economy 55 and 
LCA with focus on health related categories:  human toxicity (HT), particulate matter formation (PMF), 
photochemical oxidant formation (POF), ozone depletion (OD).   
KERs: ALL Target Groups: ALL  
Expected Outcomes KPIs and [Target]: KPI1.1 Number of positive health benefits for the citizens identified [at 
least 20]; KPI1.2  
Improvement in Air quality index (AQI) [At least by 25%]; KPI1.3 Improvement in health related LCA 
categories [At least by 30 % ];  
Significance:Iincreased expected lifespan and 
lower expenses on healthcare   
Scale: Almost 4 mln inhabitants of the Attica hub for 
circularity (~36% of population of Greece) and beyond.  
Expected Outcome 4: Use urban/industrial symbiosis and cross sectoral cooperation to pave the way for 
achieving the EU Green Deal and “Fit for 55” package objectives: providing recommendations for optimized 
regional framework conditions by highlighting barriers and suitable innovation-oriented policies for possible 
synergies with the cities selected by the Cities Mission ….”  
Pathway to impact: The European Green Deal is the strategy on addressing climate and environmental challenges. 
Through employing urban/industrial symbiosis and enhancing cross sectoral collaboration Theseus is fully in line 
with EU Green Deal and especially  
  
contributing to its following elements: EU Climate ambition (2030 as a milestone synchronised with project 
completion and 2050 in the long run), engaging several important industry representatives towards transition to 
clean and circular economy, contributing to reducing pollution toward toxic-free environment with health impact 
assessment allowing to identify the relevant benefits, and through the energy flow related activities towards 
supplying clean and secure energy. ‘Fit for 55’ package is a set of proposals that were adopted in order to update 
EU legislation related to climate, energy and transportation, to facilitate achieving EU’s climate goals and relate 
the ambitions described in GD into law. Theseus to several of them including Renewable Energy Di rective, 
Energy Efficiency Directive, Energy Performance of Buildings Directive and Updated EU rules to decarbonize 
gas markets and promote hydrogen. Athens is on the six Greek cities chosen for the Cities Mission. By working 
with local authorities, implem enting participative approach for all the stakeholders Theseus will significantly 
contribute to achieving the Missions aims by contributing to achieving climate -neutrality of Athens and Attica 
and by operating within the framework of hub based on experimen tation and innovation. Thesus will propose 
solutions tailored for Athens at the same time supporting scalability and replication to other cities. Cross-sectoral 
approach and synergies with existing initiatives (including projects, other H4C, CCRI ) will be  established. To 
assure that Theseus generates expected impact, the insights, experiences, knowledge, barriers and challenges and 
mitigation measures will be synthesized in following thematic reports: Roadmap for collaboration (i) between 
sites (GR, SWE, NO) and ii) between Hub, Common hub circularity guidelines by A.SPIRE, Strategic Master 
Plan for Circularity, Analysis of symbiotic flows in the context of EU and local regional plans, Regional and 
Intraregional development guidelines and Policy guidelines based on Material Flow Analysis, impact on the 
health and de-risking assessment. All of those documents are expected to contribute to paving the way towards 
innovation-oriented policies for Athens, but also other 5 Greek cities selected for the Cities Miss ion as well as 
Malmo.To facilitate further policies creation, Theseus will make an attempt to contribute to CEN and/or ISO 
standards.    
KERs:  1, 2, 9, 22, 23, 24 Target Groups: ALL  
 
55 https://iris.who.int/handle/10665/342218   
HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-38         Innovation Action – THESEUS H4C  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6560347 - 17/09/2024 
Page 34 of 41  
Expected Outcomes KPIs and [Target]: KPI1.1 Policy guidelines shared with regional policy makers of [min 3 
regions] KPI1.2 Number of innovations highlighted in the policy guidelines: [min 5]    
Significance: Contribution to achieving 
climate neutrality  
Scale: Number of cities from the Cities Mission on which Theseus 
might have direct impact: 7  
2.1.2 Contribution of the project to wider impacts specified in the destination   
Expected Impact: “Global leadership in clean, climate-neutral and resilient industrial value chains, circular 
economy and climate-neutral and human-centric digital systems and infrastructures.”  
Theseus project is fully aligned with the topic by working towards clean, climate-neutral and resilient industrial 
value chains, that are supported by digital systems and infrastructures facilitating tasks and providing support in 
decision making in the context of I-US and CE. Theseus is fully aligned with the key objectives of the destination 
and goals of the EU policy. Theseus deploys the HC4 concept involving and motivating European industries in 
achieving Green Deal and “Fit for 55” objectives. Through the development of Key Enabling Technologies and 
their validation, Theseus contributes towards achieving the goal of the EU Climate Neutrality, with digital, low-
carbon and circular industry being one of core elements, as described in the Green Deal. These us proposes 
innovative products and technologies supported by robotics (incl. XR for human -robot 
interactions/collaboration) and digitalization supporting informed decision making, optimization and enhancing 
collaboration, while establishing secure and sus tainable IT infrastructures in line with Digital Decade. Those 
activities are accompanied by exploitation strategies, business models, financial solutions. The implementation 
of the hub will have direct effect on the environment and health, therefore supporting Zero pollution action plan. 
Global leadership is additionally boosted through intensified collaboration cross-sectoral, between other regions, 
H4C and CCRI as well as guidelines for regional and interregional development, policy guidelines and 
contributions to future standards. Theseus introduces H4C in one of the EU cities of Cities missions, supporting 
its goals with replication cases, which will facilitate replication also beyond the project.   
Topics Serving the Objectives of the Destination and relevant to Theseus Project   
Manufacturing Industry: Theseus implements I-US, re-integrates diverse flows in the manufacturing of circular 
products working towards negative carbon footprint, keeping resources in the loop and aiming to boost circular, 
carbon-neutral industries operating on new, circular terms. This new model introduced by Theseus is supported 
by educational activities for the workforce to assure smooth transition.   
A new way to build, accelerating disruptive change in construction: CDW is one of the flows of focus of Theseus, 
therefore the project engages several important industrial representatives of the CDW sector. Theseus aims to 
improve the resource efficiency i n the sector by expanding separation and sorting of CDW, supporting 
digitalization and upskilling.   
Energy efficient and climate neutral process industries: Theseus aims to contribute to achieving P4P partnership 
objectives. Theseus will work on closing circular loops involving flows connecting different manufacturing 
sectors and P4P industries (cement, chemicals, non-ferrous metals, water) towards climate neutrality.   
Circularity and Zero Pollution in process industries: Theseus will directly contribute towards the optimization of 
resources and keeping them in the loop, reducing landfilling, improved waste management and lowering 
emissions.  
Hubs for Circularity (H4C): Theseus is directly addressing this topic, implementing I -US, enhancing 
collaboration at maximum levels within and beyond value chain, researching synergies, implementing innovative 
technologies (digital or non) supporting actions maximizing the impact in heavy industrialized urban area of 
Attica region to demonstrate a first-of-kind shift towards circularity and climate neutrality.  
2.1.3  Quantification of potential long-term impact Theseus  
  Municipal waste  Textiles  
Baseline in EU  202156: i) 527 kg generated in EU i)12.6 mln t textile waste 
generated/ year, per capita, ii) 49 % recycled and out of which 
5.2 million tonnes is clothes composted, iii) trend towards and 
footwear, ii) Collected for re-use & decrease in landfilling in the 
 
56 https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php?title=Municipal_waste_statistics  
l
a
s
t 
r
HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-38         Innovation Action – THESEUS H4C  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6560347 - 17/09/2024 
Page 35 of 41  
ecycling: 22% of post-consumer textile years iv) EU target on 
landfilled waste, iii) the rest is incinerated or waste: 10 % by 
2035  landfilled,  iv)  to  be  introduced:   
   requirement  to collect  textiles  
separately (2025) and Extended 
Producer Responsibility57  
Assumption67  Theseus technologies to allow the Theseus approach adopted across 
Europe,  
decrease in landfilling to 10 % for Theseus technologies to 
increase recycling EU countries staying behind in rate to 37 %  
the target.  
CDW (metals)  
i) average for CDW (per capita) 58: metal accounts for 4,3 %, ii) metals together with 
wood are the most precious materials in  
CDW  
  
Theseus 
technologies to 
increase recycling 
rate by 15%  
Environmental impact 4 sorting technologies contributing to i) 0.73 billion tons of CO2 that could be save 
globally  ii) the target of minimizing landfilling to 10 % of MSW generated by 2030, 
iii) improved waste management and resource efficiency, symbioti c flows energy 
contributes to reaching targets
  i) minimum of 42.5% of renewable energy by 2030 in 
EU5 , ii) Install 600GW of solar photovoltaic by 2030 in EU7 In Greece, 7.7GW of 
solar panels are aimed to be installed for electricity generation and appx. 6,978 MWh 
for heating and cooling aims to come from solar energy by 2030 iii) The RES share for 
heating/cooling to be 46% (or ~27 GWh) by 2030 and 100% by 2050 59, iv) Overall 
increase in water re -use by 50 %, re -use 90 % of the solid waste generated by the 
wastewater treatment at EU scale v)  all in digital pillar  
  increased decision making 
capacity in terms of circularity & I-US flows iii)  Collaboration pillar 
 contributing to 
environmental education, guidelines, and awareness raising about H4C   
Financial impact i) economic grow with sustainable and competitive markets, contributing to almost 73 bln 
euro savings across EU2860 ii) new (incl. green-& higher quality) job opportunities –( 
e.g. for textiles sector, around 100 jobs in GR only until 2030) & further contributing 
to potential 120k jobs in EU 61  &  6.5 mln new jobs in the construction sector 62  , 
decreasing green skills gap and increasing circular skills and green-task intensity63 iii) 
new circular business models spreading, expanding and adjusting across Europe 
according to the local needs.  
Social impact Better health as a result of improved environmental indexes resulting from H4C implementation 
( ~3,7 million citizens of Athens metropolitan area), in long -terms influencing whole 
country and replication regions (14 million European citizens  in total) and emerging 
across EU with further citizens affected.   
 Unfolding Theseus  Τhe project will unfold the outlined impacts across Europe via:   
Impacts to EU 1)The replication activities, including the 2 locations, the collaboration (IP1) and KER1: 
Roadmap for collaboration (i)between sites (GR, SWE, NO) and ii) between Hub & 
CCRI & Replication Roadmap Tool and KER2: Common hub circularity guidelines.   
2)KER22: Recommendations, analysis of symbiotic flows in the context of EU and local regional plans,  
 
57 https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_23_3635  
58 JRC130992_01.pdf Background data collection and life cycle assessment for construction and demolition waste (CDW) management  
67 an estimation based on technological progress we expect impact, current statistics as well as reports such as: 
https://circulareconomy.europa.eu/platform/sites/default/files/emaf_ce-in-cities-factsheetsproducts_all_mar19.pdf  
59 National energy and Climate plan (in Greek)  
60 https://op.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-/publication/174996c9-3947-11e8-b5fe-01aa75ed71a1/language-en  
61 https://www.sitra.fi/app/uploads/2021/03/sitra-how-does-the-circular-economy-change-jobs-in-europe-v2.pdf  
62 https://www.sitra.fi/app/uploads/2021/03/sitra-how-does-the-circular-economy-change-jobs-in-europe-v2.pdf  
63 
https://www.eesc.europa.eu/sites/def
ault/files/files/qe-07-23-330-en-n.pdf  
HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-38         Innovation Action – THESEUS H4C  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6560347 - 17/09/2024 
Page 36 of 41  
Regional and Intraregional development guidelines, KER23: Policy guidelines based 
on Material Flow Analysis, impact on the health and de -risking assessment and 
KER24: Contributions to CEN and/or ISO standards.  
3)Synergies with the cities selected by the Cities Mission and other networking 
activities (expected Outcome 4).  
4)The Dissemination & Exploitation activities to be performed.   
  
2.1.4  Potential barriers and Mitigation Measures  
The implementation of Theseus objectives is an ambitious undertaking. To assure success, analysis of barriers for 
implementation of H4C for Attica and peripheral regions encountered at the proposal writing stage have been 
summarized together with respective mitigation measures to address them. Potential barriers have been grouped 
into general and region specific having to do with the local context and current status quo of Attica region and 
Greece.  
Barriers  Theseus mitigation measures  
  
 
General   
Systemic: Management of complex 
value chains, uncertainties of 
innovation Assessing impacts. Issues 
due to lack of related Political 
directions. The diversity of existing or 
planned waste management schemes 
in Europe  
i)Theseus covers full circular flows from feedstock as secondary resource to 
final end-user, ii) Consortium has significant scientific/technical expertise to 
propose mitigation measures to any barriers related to technology/process 
iii) Theseus will monito r relevant risks to mitigate them on time (List of 
critical risks) iv) Development of Strategic Master Plan on Circularity to 
enable investment proposals that will consider topics like pricing matters, 
systems design, Regulatory Framework for included sect ors. v)multiple 
analysis of the current situation in technological, environmental and social 
level and analysis of EU and local regional plans -general strategic or related 
to wastes-, to align and optimize Theseus activities, maximize impact and 
produce p olicy recommendations and standardization activities, while 
having the Region of Attica as a member of the consortium.   
Technological/Processes related: 
Issues related to specific technologies 
/processes and their relevant 
reconfigurations and adjustments in 
existing assets and procedures. Novel 
uncertainties and lack of data.   
i)In order to assure efficient barriers mitigation at technology/process level 
Theseus Consortium consists of partners of significant scientific and 
technical expertise, that will propose measures to mitigate barriers identified 
for respective relevant technology/process, ii) Theseus will monitor relevant 
risks as part of management activities to mitigate on time.  
Social/public acceptance: Low 
acceptance of novel technologies and 
methodologies, due to lack of 
awareness, low knowledge and digital 
skills, scepticism. lack of capacity 
or/and personnel specialized in 
recycling technologies 
i)Raising social awareness using AR app, ii) promotion of Theseus activities 
through diverse communication and dissemination actions aiming at 
spreading information about project, results, benefits, iii) training activities 
in the regions cities and universities aiming at enhancing circular and digital 
upskilling for the population, the workforce and high-level decisionmakers, 
iv) enlightenment, guidance, training, and mentoring services for decision -
makers, employees, and citizens, v) knowledge sharing by the active 
involvement of a diverse groups of stakeholders through THESEUS 
Bubbles, vi) Replication activities aiming at promoting Thesus H4C in other 
locations, vii) standardization system facilitating the acceptance.  
HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-38         Innovation Action – THESEUS H4C  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6560347 - 17/09/2024 
Page 37 of 41  
Legal: lack of legislation (or 
overlapping) on 
FoaK  pioneering  technologies  not 
standardized yet. Unknown normative 
and differences between national and 
local legislations.  
i)Participation in Consortium of local actors of decisive level , ii) 
Development of standardization schemes where needed, iii) Active 
monitoring of ongoing legislation schemes at EU and national level, 
participation in technical committees (e.g. DS in CEN /CLC/JTC 24) and 
relevant events, ii) Implementation of flexible approach where applicable, 
allowing for future adjustments, iii) Cooperation with other H4C, learning 
from their experiences  
Economical: feedstocks & final 
circular product costs due collection, 
sorting, processing   
i)promote collaboration among value chain actors and knowledge exchange 
ii) Contribution to development of common standards iii) Raising awareness 
on sustainability and circularity benefits among the end users contributing to 
more stable market of circular products iv) Development of Strategic Master 
Plan on Circularity, which will consider pricing matters among others  
Region specific   
Textiles flow: Currently no 
recognized management system for 
textile waste by the Hellenic 
Recycling Agency, in Recycom 
facilities textiles are currently 
manually separated.  
i)Automated textiles separation system will greatly increase the efficiency 
of textiles separation accelerating sorting procedures and enabling recovery 
of different fibre types, ii) policy briefs recommendations to facilitate future 
actions.  
Urban waste flow: Although blue bins 
in Greece are intended to gather only 
packaging, currently most household 
recyclable materials end up in them 
making it a compilation of different 
materials.   
i) Advanced separation of mixed urban waste through fine-tuning Smart Bins 
for the needs of Attica region to recover plastics, metal, paper, and textiles 
from urban waste streams, ii) 
automated sorting for mixed waste and plastics, iii) awareness raising 
activities  
Urban waste - Packaging: Currently 
only paper, plastic and metal are 
collected as packaging waste but not 
glass and wood.   
Theseus activities will facilitate to expand collection of packaging 
materials.  
Biowaste: Separate collection of 
biobased trash has been introduced 
only in some municipalities. A portion 
ends up in blue bins by accident.   
Sorting technologies and mass flow analysis for optimal operation and  
placement of smart bins for Attika with special focus on space constraints 
typical for Attica region will pave the road towards better separation of 
biowaste.   
Energy: The integration of biogas to 
the natural gas network has not yet 
been 
implemented in Greece, legislation 
missing  
Theseus will study RES technologies application incl. biogas into DH 
systems, preparing further implementation, considering aspects like origin 
of biogas and end users/consumers perception.  
Water: Attika region is especially 
vulnerable to heat and water stress 
especially in the summer  
i) perform water needs analysis for Attica for better planning, introduce ii) 
decentralized water reuse for gardening iii) rainwater harvesting for urban 
farming iv) decentralized NBS for recovery and reuse v) Development of 
Strategic Master Plan on Circularity incl. water and wastewater services.
2.2 Measures to maximise impact #@COM-DIS-VIS-CDV@#  
To achieve its stepwise methodology, the Theseus consortium will utilize a concrete D&C plan together with an 
exploitation/commercialization plan, taking advantage of the in-project user community and external stakeholders.  
Theseus Consortium will implement an agile strategy for the dissemination, communication, and exploitation 
(DEC) actions. The application of these actions stretches from the onset and covers the duration as well as the 
period after the end of the project. DEC activities aim to accomplish Theseus’s goals by targeting specific audiences 
HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-38         Innovation Action – THESEUS H4C  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6560347 - 17/09/2024 
Page 38 of 41  
to achieve greater impact. The actions approach and communication material and channel will differentiate 
according to each of the target groups. The agility of DEC strategy lies upon a flexible responsive approach, with 
each iteration cycle relying on regular reviews and revisions. This allows the consortium to respond directly to any 
unanticipated risks that may influence the goals of the project and facilitates the opportunity to adapt to any new 
situations. The DEC plan will unfold chronologically in three phases: 1. Activation phase (M1-M6): This phase is 
dedicated to the formulation of an initial DEC plan and producing preliminary awareness for relevant sectors and 
markets. During this phase, the consortium will create a common project identity and raise interest for the expected 
results, through the preparation and distribution of customized dissemination and communication material and the 
project’s website promotion. Furthermore, the consortium will prepare an indicative schedule list of communication 
activities. This list may include events such as scientific conferences, webinars and cultural and business fairs that 
the consortium partners are involved as well as a set of indicative public events, workshops and training sessions 
that could be organized during the next phase of the DEC plan. In favor of securing the coordinated and successful 
engagement of key stakeholders a preliminary exploitation plan will be established. 2. Execution phase (M7-M32): 
This phase focuses on disseminating, communicating, and exploiting the produced outcomes to key stakeholders, 
with a particular focus on endusers. The consortium will establish more targeted awareness campaigns, disseminate 
the key exploitable results as delivered and investigate the exploitation opportu nities of each partner through 
dedicated training sessions, and tools such as surveys, and interviews. 3. Final phase (M33-M48 and beyond): In 
this phase the consortium will focus on promoting the final key exploitable results and developed business models, 
with the purpose of establishing the necessary prerequisites for broader scalability/replication, further engagement 
of new end-users and reach out to wider target audiences. Another significant objective of this phase is to establish 
a feasible go-to-market strategy and ensure that the promotion of exploitable results is maintained after the end of 
the project.  
2.2.1  Dissemination Measures   
While focused on Awareness, Interest, Desire and Action (AIDA) activities, the project's dissemination measures 
will follow a multi-actor, multi-step and multi-channel approach. Table 2.3 identifies the target audiences, specific 
dissemination objectives and target values, tailored to the needs and profile of each target audience.  
Table 2.3: Dissemination Plan – Measures, Target Audience and Target Values  
Scientific 
Publications  
Principal Decision Influencers, Decision-Making Actors, Industry Associations, 
Environmental Agencies,  
Academia, Researchers, Relevant Consortiums (such as Greek ministry of 
Environment/Development,  
Hellenic Recovery Recycling Corporation,  Attica Waste Management Union,  Hellenic 
Federation of  
Enterprises, All Greek Regions, Municipalities and Universities, Association of 
Municipalities in the Attica Region, Solid Waste Management (EDSNA), Hellenic 
Institute for Occupational Health and Safety  
(ELINY AE))  
Scientific Conferences and showcasing events (examples): World Circular Economy Forum, Eur. Conference of 
Waste Management (ECWM), Digital Recycling Conference for Circular Economy, Sustainability, and Waste 
Management (eREC), Symposium on Circular Economy and Sustainability,/, Eur. Conference on Process Safety 
and Big Data, Int. Conference on Sustainable Solid Waste Management , Materials Science and Technology in 
Europe, International Conference on Waste Recycling and Management, etc; Peer-Review OpenAccess Journal 
(preselected): Recycling, Waste Management & Research, Polymer, Sustainability, Waste Management, Journal 
of Material Cycles and Waste Management, , Resources Conservation and Recycling, etc.  
Target Values: Publishing in Peer-reviewed Journals: > 15; Presenting in Scientific Conferences: > 20.  
Technical 
Publications  
European Commission Relevant Offices, European Environment Agency, Public and 
Private Actors, ICT SMEs and large Enterprises, Formulators, Recyclers.  
THESEUS will publish and contribute to technical blog posts, articles, position/white papers, books, or any 
other reference from technology suppliers (bottom-up), in addition to references linked to the application 
scenario domains under consideration. The forthcoming issues of Institute of Environment and Development 
HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-38         Innovation Action – THESEUS H4C  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6560347 - 17/09/2024 
Page 39 of 41  
Blog and Spire database of the outputs from projects of SPIRE portfolio are excellent instances of this type of 
work.  
Target Values: Publishing Technical Publications: > 25; Participation in Industrial Exhibitions with Booths: > 9  
Source Code  Ecosystem of Open-Source Developers, Incubators, Associations and Digital Innovation 
Hubs, Data Spaces for  
Repository  circular material use, ICT SMEs, Researchers, relevant Consortia. (such as Greek DIHs, Greek 
Universities, Greek Open Source Association, Athens Digital Lab)  
Stimulating a transparent and open-source culture, THESEUS will make widely available its software 
repositories through well-known distributed source code platforms such as GitHub and Bitbucket.  
Target Values: Publicly Available Deliverables: > 15; Source code: publish to >2 different repositories.  
Q & A Platform  Public Authorities, Associations, Open-source Developers, NGOs, SMEs, relevant Hubs.  
Discussions regarding the project repository will be centered around reference sites. The designated Q&A 
platform, developed as an integral part of the project website, will be Stack Overflow - the most extensive 
and reputable online community for developers to exchange knowledge and acquire new insights.  
Target Values: No. of Scientific Conversations to Participate/Contribute: > 20.  
Workshops and 
Trainings  
Industrial Organisations, SPIRE Associations, Public Authorities, Potential Investors, 
Funding Organisations,  
ICT SMEs, Academia and research Organisations (such as Greek ministies, Hellenic 
Recovery Recycling  
Corporation,  Attica Waste Management Union,  Hellenic Federation of Enterprises, All 
Greek Regions,  
Municipalities and Universities, Association of Municipalities in the Attica Region, Solid 
Waste  
Management (EDSNA), Greek DIHs, Greek Universities, Greek Open Source 
Association, Athens Digital Lab, Hellenic Institute for Occupational Health and Safety 
(ELINY AE) , Chamber of Commerce and Industry of Athens, E.B.E.A.))  
Particular emphasis will be placed on collaboratively designing training activities and lifelong learning 
programs to ensure that THESEUS actively contributes to skills development and standardisation, as outlined in 
WP10.  
Target Values: Technical Workshops: > 10; Online Training Tutorials: > 8; Webinars: > 12.  
Joint Activities 
with relevant 
Initiatives  
All Stakeholders with special focus on secondary resources in process industry, Policy-
making Actors, Key Environmental Influencing Organisations, relevant Public Bodies.  
To further amplify and maximise the impact and outreach of project’s results and to feed them into related 
international work streams, joint dissemination activities will be contracted. Theseus will seek out opportunities 
to collaborate with other relevant  projects and initiatives within Europe and beyond, and will organise and 
participate in events promoting knowledge sharing as outlined in WP11.  
Target Values: Symposiums/Fairs to Participate: > 9; Banners in each event: > 3; Procures to be distributed: > 
300.  
Standards and Policy Contribution  Standards Developing Organisations, Certification Committees, 
Open-Source Communities, Policy Makers, Relevant Public Bodies, 
Local Agencies.  
HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-38         Innovation Action – THESEUS H4C  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6560347 - 17/09/2024 
Page 40 of 41  
THESEUS aims to support the standardisation of secondary material upcycling technologies. Collaborative 
efforts with relevant Technical Committees will be established to ensure seamless integration into current and 
future standardisation initiatives. The project's contributions will be incorporated into new or revised standards 
via one of the following channels: i) sharing information with Technical Committees, ii) facilitating mutual 
knowledge exchange, iii) submitting technical proposals, and iv) promotin g the creation of new standard 
documents, based on the maturity of the specific solution, as outlined in T11.5.   
Target Values: Standards Contribution (new or revised): ≥ 3; Policy Briefs: > 2.  
On-site Demonstrations and 
Presentations  
Industry Stakeholders, Academic Institutions, General Public  
Demonstrate practical application of project results, engage stakeholders; On -site demonstrations and 
presentations showcasing project outcomes and methodologies  
Target Values: On-site Demonstrations=5;  
2.2.2  Communication Measures  
The following design elements will be used to strengthen the project uniformity and identity and to deliver clear 
messages to the target audience: Theseus naming, logo, presentations template, templates for reports, project 
newsletter, project posters/leaf lets, etc. A recognisable visual identity is provided at the proposal stage, to be 
adapted if required. Theseus communication strategy is built upon the Promotion Mix, the 4 th element of the 
Marketing Mix, focuses on creating awareness and persuading the audience to initiate the engagement, as outlined 
in Table 2.4.   
Table 2.4: Communication plan – Communication Channels/Target Audience/Timeline and Target Values  
Project Website  ALL End-users.  From M06 to 3y 
after  
Theseus dynamic project website will be the backbone of all the D&C activities, allowing easy retrieval of main 
action data with few clicks, while acting as the core source of information about the project’s objectives, activities 
and results. The website will be launched by M06, and it will be lined with all Theseus’s social media accounts. 
It will be constantly maintained and updated regularly, running also for 3years after the project end.  
Target values: Online by: M06; Unique Visitors from M12: > 1,500; Unique Visitors from M48: > 6,500    
Social Media  ALL End-users.  From M06 to M48  
Theseus will create and actively maintain its online presence across many social media platforms, utilizing Twitter 
and LinkedIn when connecting with research and innovation networks and disseminating new publications, and 
Facebook, and Podcasts for broad community  
 
participation.  
Target Values: Size of online community (by M48): >5,000; No. of impressions (monthly average) :>500  
e-Newsletters and e-mail Campaigns  All End-users.  Bi-yearly Issues starting from 
M06  
When project findings are presented, relevant stakeholders will get e -newsletters. Emails are a very effective 
engagement tool, particularly for promoting events and outcomes across domains; hence, project communications 
will be delivered to a selected set of contact points.  
Professional marketing solutions (such as Sendinblue and Mailchimp) will be utilised to automate the 
dissemination to contact points.  
Target Values: e-Newsletters contributed/released: 8; Total Mailing List Contact Points: >2,000  
HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-38         Innovation Action – THESEUS H4C  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6560347 - 17/09/2024 
Page 41 of 41  
Policy Fora and Debate Hubs  Societal Actors, Debaters, Recycle Operations, 
Sustainable Product Organisations, Workers' Associations, 
Alliances (such as Greek ministries of Economics, Internal 
Affairs, Environment, Development, Hellenic Recovery 
Recycling Corporation, Attica Waste Management  
Union,  Hellenic Federation of Enterprises, All Greek 
Regions,  
Municipalities and Universities, Association of 
Municipalities in the  
Attica Region, Solid Waste Management (EDSNA), 
Greek DIHs,  
Greek Universities, Greek Open Source Association, 
Athens Digital Hub, Delphi Economic Forum, Greek  
Consumers Union, GSEE and other workers associations 
and unions, Hellenic Institute for Occupational Health and 
Safety (ELINY AE), Chamber of Commerce and Industry 
of Athens, E.B.E.A.)  
From Μ18 tο Μ48  
With the Science -Policy dialogue as its primary objective, Theseus will contribute to discussions and make 
recommendations regarding how the developed solutions could contribute to the sustainable, balanced, and 
inclusive development of secondary material upcycling and waste management across various industry sectors 
and products. Theseus intends to contribute to and support the activities of relevant hubs and forums, such as the 
World Economic Forum, Science Policy Forum, EIT RawMaterials Expert Forum, and GS1 linked DPP forums.   
Target Values: No. of Fora and Hubs to interact: >7; Contributions to Policy Fora/Debate Hubs: >15  
Blogs  Digital Innovation Hubs, Relevant Associations, 
Academia (such as  
Greek DIHs, Greek Universities, Greek Open Source 
Association, Athens Digital Lab)  
From Μ18 tο Μ48  
Theseus will link and execute periodic wide marketing operations in open communities, DIHs, blogs, and non -
profit organisations and channels, such as Gitter Communities, Nature.com, and non-profit organisations, such as 
RawMaterials Innovation Centers of the EIT, etc.   
Target Values: Unique Publications/Contributions to Blogs: >15; Different Blogs to Post: >8  
Printed Material  ALL end users attending physical events  From M06 to M48  
Theseus will develop a distinct visual identity and reference promotional instrument when participating in events, 
including brochures, catalogues, posters and any other laid out paper-based resource. Most of the content will be 
in digital format (QR-codes will be leveraged to allow visitors to see project brochures/flyers in digital format). 
Printed material will be avoided highlighting on the overall “green” aspect of the project.  
Target Values: No. of QR - scans per material (i.e., brochures, flyers, posters, etc.): >1500; Roll-up Banners: >6  
Multimedia  ALL end-users focusing on Regional and Local 
Authorities  
From M09 to M48  
The project will develop multimedia content for a self-explanatory and aesthetically pleasing presentation of the 
project, utilizing various distribution channels for marketing (e.g., YouTube, Vimeo). In addition, in close 
connection with the Theseus capac ity building efforts, a series of video interviews will be conducted with 
scientific partners to collect feedback, taking use of plenary sessions and other events.  
Target Values: No. of short videos and interviews produced in total: 7; No. of views: >5,000  
Exploitation Plan and sustainability  
HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-38         Innovation Action – THESEUS H4C  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6560347 - 17/09/2024 
Page 42 of 41  
Turing brilliant R&I into successful commercial products is a complex task with more failures than successes. 
Most failures occur because there is a lack of Product/Market fit or to put it simply, the product that is built is not 
what the market wants to buy. To orientate the outcomes from Theseus towards viable commercial solutions and 
assets, the consortium will adopt a focused commercialization strategy with measurable outcomes by embedding 
best practice into the project’s lifecycle. The exploitation and commercialization tasks in WP11 will focus on 
delivering solutions that have a clear market opportunity that can be proven and validated through the pilots with 
key stakeholders and in close collaboration with formulators, recyclers, public authorities, and standardization 
actors. The completed business 
models and marketing plan will aim 
to outline viable and commercially 
relevant products and assets from the 
project by taking a broad cross-
consortium perspective, with 
credibility built on a foundation of 
embracing industry best practice for 
bringing new products to market. To 
achieve sustainability for the KERs 
and prepare the ground for market 
entry, the consortium has drafted the 
exploitation plan presented in Figure 
9, which is split in 3 distinct phases: 
Phase 1: setting the necessary conditions for the exploration of the business plan; Phase 2: validating the 
developed solution, aligns with market and prepares the go to market strategy; Phase 3: featuring the 
sustainability and commercialization roadmap. It is important to highlight that Theseus shall have a complete 
exploitation plan with a clear analysis of the whole value chain and the opportunities that arise across the 5 
analyzed value chains. Potential market regulations that are needed will also be considered through the 
participation of the local public authorities. The replication potential in Europe will be achieved through the 
participation of International Companies like Thrace Group, Halcor etc. and further supported by a common H4C 
replication scheme provided by SPIRE and all the SPIRE members. In addition seeking of additional investments 
shall be performed at this stage of commercialization If the technology and partners are ready, it is possible to 
create a legal structure (new start-up), set up organizational procedures (IPR contracts) and team (job creation), to 
market the solution and signed the first commercial contracts before the end of the project.  
Key Exploitable Results (KERs) and individual exploitation plans  
The consortium partners have decided to take a multi-level approach towards managing the knowledge produced, 
where the respective knowledge producer holds the rights to the knowledge and shares the software and material 
implementation with the rest of the consortium. The initial exploitation intentions towards the Theseus KERs are 
presented in Table 2.5, which will be further refined during the project.  
Table 2.5: KERs (Type: Product (P), Service (S), Other (O); Services: Support (Su), Training (T), Consulting (C), 
Extension (E)) ; Licensing: Open source(O), Commercial(CO)   
KERs  Owner  Type  Licensing  Services  Time to market  
KERs resulting from Pilar 1:        
Roadmap for collaboration   CIRCE  S  O/CO   C, T, 
E    
0.5y after project   
  
Common hub circularity guidelines  A.SPIRE  S  O/CO   C, T, E   0.5y after project   
AR for social awareness and acceptance  ICCS  S/P  O/CO  Su, C, T, E   0.5y after project   
KERs resulting from Pilar 2:        
Circular construction material  SINTEF/TUD   P  O/CO  Su, C, T, E   0.5y after project   
Biobased thin films for packaging   NCSR   P  O/CO  Su, C, T, E   0.5y after project   
Electrospinning for thin films   NTUA   P  O/CO  Su, C, T, E   0.5y after project   
 
  
HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-38         Innovation Action – THESEUS H4C  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6560347 - 17/09/2024 
Page 43 of 41  
Biological recycling & spinning for 
upcycling  
CIRCE, HUD  P  O/CO  Su, C, T, E   0.5y after project   
Upcycled packaging, masterbatches    HMU  P  O/CO  Su, C, T, E   0.5y after project   
Strategic Master Plan on Circularity  NTUA, EYDAP  S  O/CO  Su, C, T, E   0.5y after project   
KERs resulting from Pilar 3:        
Decentralized sewage mining and NBS 
for water reuse    
EYDAP   P  O/CO  Su, C, T, E   0.5y after project   
Sewage sludge valorisation  NTUA   P  O/CO  Su, C, T, E   0.5y after project   
Centralized reclaimed water fertigation   NTUA  P  O/CO  Su, C, T, E   0.5y after project   
H2 for production of heat and electricity 
through a  
CHP  
CERTH   P  O/CO  Su, C, T, E   0.5y after project   
New generation of HVFP solar thermal 
technology   
CERTH/TVP  P  O/CO  Su, C, T, E   0.5y after project   
KERs resulting from Pilar 4:       
Automated textiles separation system   ICCS   P  O/CO  Su, C, T, E   0.5y after project   
Automated sorting for mixed waste and 
plastics   
ICCS   P  O/CO  Su, C, T, E   0.5y after project   
Industrial sorting systems: Glass/copper & 
metals sorting system  
ICCS  P  O/CO  Su, C, T, E   0.5y after project   
XR for human-robot 
interactions/collaboration  
ICCS  P  O/CO  Su, C, T, E   0.5y after project   
Dynamic symbiotic maps, prediction 
models, DPPs and optimization for smart 
bins   
ICCS   P  O/CO  Su, C, T, E   0.5y after project   
H4C Marketplace with advanced 
matchmaking features & secure data 
exchange   
IRIS/ICCS   
P/S  
O/CO  Su, C, T, E   0.5y after project   
Models: i) WEF nexus, ii) Cities climate 
& impacts  
Imperial, NTUA  S  O/CO  Su, C, T, E   0.5y after project   
KERs resulting from Pilar5 :    
Regional & Intraregional guidelines  UAGEAN, LiU  O  O/CO  C, E   0.5y after project   
Policy guidelines based on Material Flow 
Analysis, impact on the health and de -
risking assessment  
RISA  
O  
O/CO  C, E   0.5y after project   
Contributions to CEN and/or ISO 
standards   
DS/SN  O  O/CO  C, E   0.5y after project   
Preliminary market analysis with needs, value propositions, and target stakeholders for exploitation  
EU alone produces more than 2 billion tn of waste per year64 or 4.8 tn/capita, primarily from construction, mining 
and industry. Out of these quantities of waste generated annually in the EU only 50% is recycled and only 10% of 
those recycled materials are returned back to the economy65, while in Greece the recycling ratio is lower and close 
 
64 https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php?title=Waste_statistics#Total_waste_generation   
65 Hedberg, A., & Šipka, S. (2020). The circular economy: Going digital. In European Policy Centre (Issue March). https://circulareconomy.europa.eu/platform/sites/default/files/drce_final.pdf.   
HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-38         Innovation Action – THESEUS H4C  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6560347 - 17/09/2024 
Page 44 of 41  
to 30% according to the approved National Waste Management Plan (NWMP 66 ). Given that the world’s raw 
materials consumption is expected to nearly double by 2060 67  the environmental pressures from materials 
extraction, processing, use and waste management lead to very significant environmental pressures contributing to 
70% of global GHG emissions and extraction and use driving more than 90% of biodiversity loss and water stress68.  
Between 2015 and 2021, the average circularity rate for all EU member states (EU -27) increased by only 0.4 
percentage points while, the 2021 EU circularity rate of 11.7 % is higher than the most recent global circularity 
rate which stands at 7.6 %, down fr om 9.1 % in 2018 78. In this framework, the following analysis addresses the 
market potential for each waste flow, based on the suggested symbiotic flows.  
In terms of dynamics, In EU-27 and Switzerland, the production of waste from textiles is estimated between 5.869 
to 7.5 80 million tn, corresponding to an annual 11.3 to 15 kg/person, which is expected to increase to 20 
kg/person/year81. In EU separate collection -toconsumption ratios range from 11% (Italy) to more than 70% 
(Germany) and remains very low with few exceptions 70. For the Theseus project, used textiles will be collected 
from the private system of the approximately 2.500 purple bins in Greece that operates in close cooperation with 
cities, as well as the blue bin, where mixed recycled waste is collected and monitor ed by the local authorities. 
Textile wastes refer to 11,8% of USW with projections to collect up to 27.778 tn from purple bins and recover 
14.958 tn by 2030 from common bins by 2030. Considering that, an average of 20 to 35 jobs are created for every 
1.000 tn of textiles collected for re -use71 (such as selling them secondhand) the effect of the Theseus project is 
expected to be significant, especially in the framework of local communities. In terms of environmental protection, 
the positive impact is also expected to be significant, since GHG emissions would decrease by approximately 44% 
if a If the number of times a garment is worn were doubled, compared to the production of a new garment72.  
The amount of urban solid, mixed waste approximates at 3.2 billion tons. It is estimated that from this amount 47% 
is landfilled, 31% recycled and 22% incinerated73. Thus, almost 70% of waste is currently not reused or recycled. 
According to the 2030 EU targets, recycling rates must come up to 65% for MSW, 70% for CDW and 75% for 
packaging waste, while of industrial symbiosis and eco-design must facilitate this process. Theseus will facilitate 
the urban waste metabolism from generation to treatment, following a material flow analysis by proposing 
innovative ways of reuse for waste stream. Urban mixed waste including packaging, biobased waste and plastics 
will be collected from municipal bins, and industrial waste from private project partners’ waste streams, following 
the specific targets of the National Waste Management Plan (NWMP 2020 as revised in 2022).  
CDW and other industrial waste streams, including metals, glass and marble will be collected from various sources 
such as civil engineering works, demolition projects, municipal waste and industrial waste (e.g. incineration fly 
ash for the recovery of meta ls). The construction and demolition industry is responsible for the production of 
immense quantities of waste. In the EU alone, it accounts for approximately 30% of the total waste generated 86. 
About 374 million tons of CDW were generated in 201674, making it the largest waste stream in the EU by weight. 
According to the findings of the current Study, the respective amount for Greece was estimated up to 4,5 million 
tons for 2019. The recovery and recycling rate of CDW in Greece ranges from 12%-15%, out of which, only a very 
limited amount of CDW  
  
is currently treated for reuse or recycling 75 . The existing CDW treatment facilities in Greece treat mainly the 
mineral fraction of CDW, while materials such as metals, plastics and glass (when present) are sent to other 
recycling facilities that handle each specific material fraction. For the Theseu s project CDW will be sorted 
dependent on particle sizes for an optimal reactivity environment and either used directly for the production of 
cement, or mixed with other streams such as fibers, glass and be further used for the production of insulation panels 
 
66 https://ypen.gov.gr/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/%CE%B5%CE%B3%CE%BA%CF%81%CE%B9%CF%83%CE%B7-%CE%95%CE%A3%CE%94%CE%91.pdf   
67 https://www.oecd.org/env/global-material-resources-outlook-to-2060-9789264307452-en.htm   
68 International Resource Panel (IRP). (2020). Global resources outlook 2019: Natural resources for the future we want. Paris: IRP: https://www.resourcepanel.org/reports/global-resources-outlook  78 Circle 
Economy. (2023). The circularity gap report 2023. Amsterdam: Circle Economy: https://www.circularity-gap.world/   
69 Beasley, J. and Georgeson, R., 2014, Advancing resource efficiency in Europe. Indicators and waste policy scenarios to deliver a resource efficient and sustainable Europe, European Environmental Bureau, 80 
Scaling textile recycling in Europe–turning waste into value, McKinsey &Company, July 2022; (Eurostat Prodcom database; Intecus, Germany report, 2020; ISPRA, 2021; ISPRA, 2022;) 81 European Environment 
Agency (EEA), 2019 Textiles and the environment in a circular economy:   
70 Watson, D., et al., 2017, Business Models Extending Active Lifetime of Garments Supporting Policy instruments:   
71 Sustainable and Circular Textiles by 2030, Factsheet, European Commission: https://environment.ec.europa.eu/strategy/textiles-strategy_en   
72 Durable, repairable and mainstream, ECOS Aril 2021: https://ecostandard.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/04/ECOS-REPORT-HOW-ECODESIGN-CAN-MAKE-OUR-TEXTILES-CIRCULAR.pdf   
73  Tisserant et al., 2017. Solid Waste and the Circular Economy: A Global Analysis of Waste Treatment and Waste Footprints: 
https://doi.org/10.1111/jiec.12562  86 Eurostat (2019): Generation of waste by waste category, hazardousness and NACE Rev. 2 activity  
74 European Environmental Agency (EEA)/European Topic Centre on Waste and Materials in a Green Economy (2020). Construction and Demolition Waste: challenges and opportunities in a circular economy:  
https://www.eea.europa.eu/themes/waste/waste-management/construction-and-demolitionwaste-challenges   
75 Bio by Deloitte, 2014, Construction and demolition waste management in Greece.  
HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-38         Innovation Action – THESEUS H4C  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6560347 - 17/09/2024 
Page 45 of 41  
ass well as other construction materials, such as bricks. Other innovative solutions, expected to be developed in the 
framework of Theseus, include innovative recovery of metals from CDW and involves automated processes that 
employ magnetic and eddy current configurations. Latest advances demonstrate use of visual recognition systems 
coupled with robotics, with instances exhibiting capacity to handle waste up to 30kg.  Based on this preliminary 
market analysis, the use of innovative solutions like those to be developed by Theseus targeting the more resource 
efficient use of are vital for the waste management sector in Europe and the role of the H4C will be to lead systemic 
change in the chosen waste streams and facilitate multistakeholder engagement, circular-oriented decision-making, 
circular value capture models, co -creation, and diffusion of a sustainability culture and, thus enabling the 
development of efficient strategies by extending the network of and governance. Since, circular economy can foster 
renewable material source to enhance economic growth and create employment opportunities, which in turn while 
minimize landfill and other management costs, the status of the market offers favourable framework conditions to 
position the innovative circular technologies of Theseus across a diverse array of stakeholders’ groups, as in Table 
2.6. Table 2.6: Preliminary outline of customers’ needs and value propositions  
Customers   Key Needs  Main Value Propositions  
Waste  
Suppliers  
Sound management of by -products 
engaging lowcost solutions; Valorisation 
of by -products streams; Increased 
profitability; Reduced carbon footprint; 
foster employment ; Reduce disposal 
costs.  
Sustainable pathways for utilising by -product/waste; 
Alternative and increased revenue streams along with reduced 
taxes due to decreased waste management; Compliance with 
the EU regulation frameworks regarding waste, packaging, 
emissions and circular economy.  
Producers  
Processors   
Innovative technologies to incorporate 
new streams of waste as raw material; 
Scale-up production to meet increased 
demand; Return on investment on 
sustainable technologies; Creation of 
new green jobs; Compliance with 
regulations; Novel opportunities for 
scaling up circular solutions  
Develop innovative technologies and processes in order to 
manage streams of incoming waste-raw material; Engage Best 
Available Techniques (BATs); Change of mindsets regarding 
circularity and industrial symbiosis models;  
Increased efficiency in production processes with cost-
effective technologies;  
Improved sustainability and marketable products with lower 
carbon footprint; New business models serving as concrete 
demand, improving economic performance; Access to green 
funding for investment in circular innovation;   
End-users  
New economic opportunities; 
Diversification of sources of products 
and minimization of risks springing from 
monopoly markets; Circular products 
with a lower environmental and carbon 
footprint; Reduced waste;  
Increased quality of the produced products; Improved 
corporate ESG performance; Affordability of the products; 
Improved sustainability with lower carbon footprint; Access to 
green funding for green investment;  
For the value propositions to effectively address the needs of the potential customer groups, Theseus solutions 
and products need to be  
  
introduced to market and keep its value chains sustainably operational. To this end, an initial set of requirements 
and potential obstacles that the exploitation strategy needs address, as well as key relevant actions and levers that 
will be employed were identified, presented in Table 2.7.  Table 2.7: Initial set of requirements, potential obstacles, 
actions and supporting factors for exploitation  
Requirements & 
Obstacles  Relevant Actions and Supporting Factors for Exploitation  
Lack of interest in 
the innovative 
services and digital 
tools produced   
The benefits of innovative services and digital tools will be demonstrated and validated, 
alongside their pilot implementation. Theseus solutions will be designed with end -users 
in complete value chains, safeguarding, that they will cover real needs. User acceptance 
will be validated at several stages to build confidence, that solutions and products can 
respond to market demands.  
HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-38         Innovation Action – THESEUS H4C  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6560347 - 17/09/2024 
Page 46 of 41  
Further advancement 
of techs in terms of 
TRL   
Partners (researchers, technology developers and value chain players) are highly 
motivated by the potential of the Theseus solutions and are committed to exploit the 
project’s results, investing the resources required to develop them further, to reach the 
commercialisation stage. Go-to-market strategies (with identified options for acquiring 
external financing / funding if needed) to this end will be delivered, before the end of the 
project.  
IPR management  
An IPR management strategy will be developed during the project, describing the 
baseline for managing the IP produced within Theseus and setting the basis for the 
exploitation of project results after the end of the grant. Specifically, for IP protection, the 
proper protection measures will be identified and all the necessary actions to apply them 
will be carried out (starting within the project’s duration), to facilitate exploitation at least 
within the target market of Theseus.   
Needs for 
standardization   
As any new technology, compliance and refinement (if needed) to existing standards and 
upcoming standardization activities are key requirements for its release to the market. As 
the further development of related standards can affect market growth, Theseus  will 
contribute to standardization activities, to support easy-to-market solutions.  
  
Sustainability of 
financing for 
exploitation after the 
project end  
Aside from investing own resources, partners are willing to continue the development 
and exploitation of the Theseus technologies and products, sustainably operating the 
value chains set up and demonstrated during the project. Further financing sources wil l 
be investigated as well, either from national and EU funds, and/or by approaching private 
investors, building on the go -to-market strategies developed during the project. More 
specifically additional sources of funding coming from Innovation Fund , InvestEU and 
ESIF will be considered. A dedicated strategy for the additional investment will run at the 
last year of the project.   
Availability of initial 
demand for driving 
product sales and 
market shares  
The consortium’s pilot partners will provide the initial demand needed to successfully 
market the solutions beyond the end of the grant. As early adopters, they are also 
committed to further promote the technologies/products to their ecosystem for identifying 
additional customers.  
2.2.3  Strategy and procedures for IP management  
IPR issues have been discussed by the consortium during the proposal preparation phase for the commitment of 
the offered technical solutions and by consulting their respective partners’ legal offices. In conformance with the 
rules for participation of current European Programs, a minimum set of basic principles concerning ownership of 
knowledge and access rights have been fixed and will be detailed with the signature of a consortium agreement 
(CA), before the start of the project, which will regulate rights  and obligations by all partners and will be further 
updated this during the project. The IPR provisions distinguish between 2 basic types: i) Background Knowledge: 
Access rights necessary for the execution of the project will be granted on a royalty free basis. ii) Foreground 
Knowledge: Intellectual property protection of foreground, i.e., the new technologies and knowledge developed in 
the project and its applications will be filled, owned and funded by the partner(s) that developed the particular 
results. Each partner shall inform the Project Coordinator and the project partners 4 weeks in advance of the filing 
of a patent application. Subject to the provisions of the EU Grant Agreement and the CA any owner of any result 
shall be free to use such results and to move it to the market. In case of joint ownership each owner shall be free to 
use such results in its own organisation but adhere to the CA and exploitation strategy with regards to 
commercialisation. Relevant to knowledge management Theseus will em ploy the following strategy: • Intra -
Consortium Knowledge Management: 1) Technical and scientific progress: create documents and place them in a 
document repository to ensure that every partner has access to them. 2) Exploitation perspectives: the WP 
exploitation leader will structure, and map required knowledge and extra -knowledge needed to enhance 
exploitation (i.e., patents, technology transfer agreements, potential users, other projects) and propose an 
exploitation strategy. • Extra-Consortium Knowledge Management: The exploitation leader will be in charge of 
HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-38         Innovation Action – THESEUS H4C  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6560347 - 17/09/2024 
Page 47 of 41  
collecting and proposing to the consortium all matters referring to the results for dissemination and will monitor 
the productivity of the project in terms of knowledge publications (scientific papers, posters, etc.). #§COM-DIS-
VIS-CDV§#  
 
 
HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-38         Innovation Action – THESEUS H4C