3.2 CAPACITY OF PARTICIPANTS AND CONSORTIUM AS A WHOLE ...................................................................................................... 
37 3.2.1 ASSOCIATED PARNERS ...................................................................................................................................................... 
38  
SECTION 4 ETHICS ............................................................................................................ ..................................................... 40
4.1 Ethical dimension of the objectives, methodology and likely impact 
.......................................................................................... 40
4.2  Compliance with ethical principles and relevant legislations 
................................................................................................... 40  
  
  
  
TITLE: A First of a kind Hub for circularity  demonstrator for Attica and peripheral regions; Topic addressed: 
HORIZON-CL4-2024- 
TWIN-TRANSITION-01-38 Hubs for circularity for industrialised urban peripheral areas (Processes4Planet 
partnership) #@APP- 
FORM-HERIAIA@#  
HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-38         Innovation Action – THESEUS H4C  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6560347 - 17/09/2024 
Page 3 of 41  
  
1 Excellence #@REL-EV A-RE@#
1.1 Objectives and ambition #@PRJ-OBJ-PO@#  
Industrial-Urban symbiosis (I -US) involves municipalities and 
regions cooperating with industries on the management of resources, 
waste, energy, water, infrastructures, services, transportation and 
networks. I -US harnesses circularity potential through sec tor 
integration. It offers a novel approach for regional eco -industrial 
development 1 , supporting urban transition towards sustainability, 
offering effective ways to reduce resource consumption and emissions 
in the city 2  with tangible results 3 , addressing many challenges and 
offering future opportunities4,5. That is why I-US has been recognized 
by the process industries as a key strategy for achieving carbon 
neutrality by 2050 and is one of 4 key pillars in the roadmap by ASPIRE6. To accelerate circular transition a wide 
range of related actions should be implemented. Thus, cooperation of stakeholders at all levels is required and 
setting up First-of-a-kind (FOAK) large scale plants integrating I- 
US cases is a key step for proving and scaling up I -US solutions in regional and interregional level. This inter -
disciplinary and cross-sectoral character is implemented by Hubs4Circularity (H4C) in a FOAK approach, as key 
instruments for delivering territ orial I -US solutions in Europe by Processes4Planed partnership 7. Theseus will 
develop a systemic I-US solution, a FOAK H4C demonstrating solutions in semiindustrial scale and involving 
authorities, research operators, companies, and industries from Attica (incl. Athens metropolitan area 7  -Greek 
capital,  68 municipalities, 2.928 km2, ~3,7 million inhabitants ~35% of national- several industrial and semi-urban 
areas) and surrounding regions. Theseus will validate new or existing technologies and develop solutions for water, 
energy and materials based on regional needs (Innovation Pillar (IP) 2 , 3) and digital/robotic technologies (IP4). 
The hub will operate under innovative governance and cooperation  models of involved stakeholders, to enable 
pilots, upscale solutions, exploit outcomes, attract further companies and expand existing ecosystem (IP1,5). Water, 
energy and material flows were targeted selected, being widely spread, having high potential all over Europe and 
included in EU/P4P strategies. The overall systemic, based on regional science approach and IP1,IP5 activities will 
ensure strong insights to smoothly replicate Theseus solutions to other EU regions. Several existing innovations 
from H4C, I-US and Circular Cities and Regions Initiative (CCRI) projects will be used, retrofitted and expanded. 
All the activities will be supported transversely by digital solutions (IP4).   
The systemic solution of Theseus is expected to have significant impact on the region, while 
metaphorically recalling the mythical figure of Theseus, king and great reformer of Athens.  
1.1.1  Vision and Special Objectives  
SO1 To initiate, boost and fast track systemic transformation in Attica and peripheral regions by deploying circular 
solutions with minimal  
  
environmental, social and financial impact through implementation of I-US (including flows of materials, energy, 
water) at FOAK plant scale towards the first real hub for circularity (H4C) in Greece, contributing to deploying 
climate neutral solutions, clo sing circular loops and achieving global leadership to related solutions (P4P 
objectives).  
 
1 2020, Yuli Bian et al., A Sectoral Eco-Eciency Analysis on Urban-Industrial Symbiosis  
2 2020, Sun Lu et al., Energy-saving and carbon emission reduction effect of urban-industrial symbiosis implementation with feasibility analysis in the city  
3 2020, Chunyang Lu et al., Uncovering the benefits of integrating industrial symbiosis and urban symbiosis targeting a resource-dependent city: A case study of Yongcheng, China  
4 2019, M.A. Butturi et al., Renewable energy in eco-industrial parks and urban-industrial symbiosis: A literature review and a conceptual synthesis  
5 2018, Luca Fraccascia, Industrial symbiosis and urban areas: a systematic literature review and future research directions  
6 Processes4Planet 2050 roadmap https://www.spire2030.eu/sites/default/files/pressoffice/publication/processes4planet_2050_roadmap_jan2021.pdf 7 
https://www.aspire2050.eu/p4planet/about-p4planet  
7 https://www.emta.com/network/athens/identification-of-the-metropolitan-area/   

HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-38         Innovation Action – THESEUS H4C  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6560347 - 17/09/2024 
Page 4 of 41  
Theseus will embrace multiple aspects of ecosystem to foster circular transition within Attica and other regions, 
based on five innovation pillars (IPs) assuring the transformation is addressed by a systemic holistic approach. IPs 
embrace technical innovation and process-based approach, focusing on symbiotic flows and closing the loops of 
water, energy (IP3), materials (IP2), and on digitalization, robotics (IP4), embedded by governance (IP5) where 
key role is played by Attica Region and Municipalities, enh anced through collaboration (IP1). IP1 will enhance 
cross-sectoral collaboration, replication and collaboration with HE projects e.g. W2W, DigInTraCE, H4Cs and 
ECoP e.g. IS2H4C, REDOL, and CCRIs e.g. CSSBoost. IP1 aims to raise social citizens awareness us ing novel 
engaging technologies like AR. The systemic transformation within Attica will be complemented by assessing the 
impact at flow level and hub overall in terms of potential benefits on the health of the citizens and roll -out risks 
analysis. The approach proposed will contribute to EU Cities Mission, by helping Athens, one of mission’s cities, 
becoming climate neutral and paving H4Cs, enabling other cities to follow.  
Relation to the call: “ A systemic solution for a H4C including technological and non -technological as well as regional 
and interregional aspects: closing circularity loops for mixed/combined materials streams based on upcycling and 
process-based approach to a range of recycling solutions including conversion and downstream, complex multi-material 
streams, valorisation of waste streams (urban mining); Citizens living in cities will benefit from a healthier environment 
through industrial/urban symbiosis by lowering emissions throug h circular and renewable energy sources and waste 
reduction; … to support the goals of the smart cities mission by contributing to a healthier urban industrial symbiosis 
through waste reduction;  
Use established reporting methodologies… interact with the ECoP for support… on technological and non-
technological issues”  
KPI1.1 At least 5 examples of technological innovations on products, processes, or robotics implemented; KPI 1.2 
Establishment of at least  
6 cross-sectoral collaborations, replication related collaborations, collaborations with other projects; KPI 1.3 Health 
benefits of hub  
implementation identified and impact assessed at least 6 flows; KPI 1.4 At least 4 de-risking 
strategies presented.  
KERs: 
ALL 
  
  
SO2 To align the Strategic Masterplan on Circularity of resource management with P4P objectives, thus deploying 
climate neutral solutions, closing circular loops and achieving global leadership to related solutions, following H4C 
principles and through the implementation of the 9 proposed circular flows.  
Theseus will design and implement closing of circular loops involving 9  material flows connecting different 
manufacturing sectors and P4P industries (cement, chemicals, non -ferrous metals, water). It will propose full 
technological schemes from secondary resource collection up to the validation by the final user. Secondary 
resources coming from combined and mixed sources: textiles, Municipal Solid Waste (MSW), glass, Construction 
& demolition waste (CD W) and marbles are collected & separated/sorted. This is followed by processing, to be 
used as feedstock for creating circular products to be tested by final users from construction, packaging, glass, 
metals sectors. It will evaluate the circularity of resource/material flows and value (intrinsic circularity and 
consequential sustainability) creation. This novel methodology will e nable the investigation of virgin materials 
substitution and waste reduction, degree of circularity, quality changes (e.g. downcycling, upcycling) and 
environmental, economic, and social impacts (e.g. climate neutrality). Theseus will ensure its solutions avoid false 
redirection of secondary resources (displace virgin material in one sector but hinder another) to abide by EU 
recycling targets or create negative effects. Material Flow Analysis (MFA) will support to identify flows and stocks 
of materials in T M-WEMW8  model, validating trade -offs and avoid burden shifting between nexus and value 
chains. Those activities will be enhanced through the Strategic Master Plan on CE, which will include pricing, 
systems design, and regulatory framework for all the Hub sectors and will be developed by local authorities and 
scientific partners.  
The activities will support the implementation of the Regional Plan on Waste management which has been 
developed by the Attika Region.  
 
8 Territorial Metabolism Water-Energy-Materials-Waste   
HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-38         Innovation Action – THESEUS H4C  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6560347 - 17/09/2024 
Page 5 of 41  
Relation to the call: “Proposals can address either materials, water or energy, or a combination of those. 
Management and processing of secondary resource streams through e.g., collection, disassembly, sorting, 
purification, concentration, recycling (including but not limited to chemical, metallurgical, or bio-based resources), 
logistics and trading for their valorisation for the use as feedstock for other plants and companies across sectors 
and/or across value chains. Connections with manufacturing industries are expected…”  
KPI2.1 At least 6 technological schemes from collection to use established; KPI2.2 At least 5 circular 
products tested by end users;  
KERs: 4-
9 
  
SO3 To Demonstrate the valorisation of reclaimed water reuse at various scales and rainwater harvesting leading to 
the reduction of freshwater consumption. To implement decarbonization strategies to outdated district heating (DH) 
systems contributing closing energy loops. To demonstrate innovative sewage sludge thermal treatment for energy 
and materials recovery through fast pyrolysis.   
Theseus expanding tested solutions from previous projects (HYRDOUSA, TRINEFLEX, IMPETUS) will 
implement centralized & decentralized solutions for treatment and valorisation of non-conventional water sources 
(wastewater, rain/storm). Novel decentralised MBR sewer mining technologies will be deployed in the sewer 
network of Athens to irrigate green spaces, reducing freshwater demand and heat stress especially during heatwaves. 
Centralised reclaimed reuse of agricultural irrigation will be integrated with fertigation process leading to increased 
soil biodiversity and good plant growth with minimal chemical fertilizers. Sewage sludge produced from centralized 
WWTPs will be transformed via innovative fast pyrolysis process to high calorific value gas and biochar to be 
valorised. Also, nature-based solutions (NBS - bioswales) for rain/stormwater valorisation for urban and industrial 
use within Athens, and standard rainwater harvesting solutions to support urban farming practices in households 
and schools will be applied. Different decarbonization strategies of DH will be tested on peripheral scale  
  
and studied theoretically to reach conclusions for future implementation in Attica. An innovative solar thermal 
technology for DH and cooling of 2 buildings in Ptolemaida town will be demonstrated and the potential connection 
to city’s central DH network w ill be assessed. Green H2 use for producing heat via fuel cell system will also be 
demonstrated in the local CERTH building. The introduction of other renewable energy sources (locally sourced 
bio-waste/ biomass) will be studied for city network, currently  exploiting waste heat from fossil fuel 
(decarbonization til 2028). All approaches will be combined with replicators to produce strategy for other EU 
regions and upscaling in Attica.   
Relation to the call: “Consider when applicable the co -development of industrial decarbonization strategies with 
urban district heating networks, i.e., based on a socio-economic optimum in the cascading re-use of waste heat and 
using the district heating network to supply low temperature process heat…; Proposals can address either materials, 
water or energy, or a combination of those…; Reduce the freshwater consumption of the urban area by 50%, and 
re-use 90% of the solid waste generated by the water treatment”.  
KPI 3.1 Decentralized reclaimed water reuse solutions for irrigation of urban green spaces (sewer mining); KPI 3.2 
Centralized reclaimed water reuse solution in the Eastern Attika serviced by 3 medium scale WWTPs for 
agricultural irrigation (~3.6 million p.e.); KPI 3.3: Rainwater harvesting solutions including NBS to valorise 
rainwater/stormwater through urban farming activities and urban use; KPI 3.4 Sewage sludge valorisation through 
i)fast pyrolysis to produce biochar, biooil and gas and through ii) torrefaction to achieve energy densification KPI
3.4 Co -development of 3 decarbonization strategies for Ptolemaida DH operator KPI 3.5 Real application of 
renewable  
sources for heating/cooling needs of 2 buildings considering CE aspects (recyclable materials for solar 
thermal systems etc.).  
KERs: 10 -
14 
  
  
SO4 To facilitate the activities within the Hub and foster circularity through digitalization and robotics. To further 
enhance the transition and foster implementation of H4C concept through diverse digital technologies at practical 
and theoretical level.  
HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-38         Innovation Action – THESEUS H4C  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6560347 - 17/09/2024 
Page 6 of 41  
Theseus will develop advanced sorting & separation technologies with digital tools and robotics to enhance flows’ 
quality and purity and reuse potential. Sorting will be applied on textiles and advanced separation in urban wastes, 
plastics, metals, glass.  Smart b in optimization will be applied focusing on space limitations, typical in Attica, 
improving the separation capabilities for biowaste/organic from MSW. Theseus will introduce multi -sensor 
classifiers and multiple -robot setups to sorting lines. Human -robot collaboration will be fostered through MR 
techniques. I-US Attica digital Marketplace will be developed, a digital community hub, engaging companies and 
industries from Attica and surrounding regions, supporting secure data exchange and features for traceability, DPPs, 
MFA, matchmaking, LCA, AI prediction, optimization, improved logistics (and reverse), scheduling and financial 
tools. Dynamic DPPs (T3.3) for novel circular products will be developed, adjustable and scalable to other sectors, 
for info rmed decision making and opportunities identified by matchmaking features (T3.2). A territorial 
visualization GIS tool (T3.1) will be developed for dynamic symbiotic maps in the region while PRLM 10 (T3.4) 
will predict the material flows providing insights into bottlenecks and opportunities for decision -making on 
synergies. TM -WEMW nexus modelling tool (WP9) will also be integrated to analyze territorial resources 
interactions, providing valuable ins ights to planners and decision makers by integrating scenar io planning 
capabilities considering socio -demographic, economic, policy, population, housing, and behavioral factors 
influencing Theseus solution impacts. Theseus will develop a Replication Roadmap Tool , which will improve 
identifying opportunities and decision-making for replicators. Also, computation of pertinent financial metrics and 
suitable economic indicators will facilitate the estimation and mitigation of economic impacts and associated risks 
on specific material flow processes with potential for improved economic efficiency.  
Relation to the call: “Digital tool, recycling and sensor-based waste sorting, modelling tools, including material passport 
and information on material  
streams, as basis for resource management towards fully integrated LCA and Material Flow Analysis MFA (on diverse 
levels) and for creating transparency and matchmaking opportunities across hubs. Prepare for tagging/matrix for complex 
consumer products and innovative approach to end-of life materials. Establish IT infrastructures and tools that provide a 
secure basis for the integrated management and the preservation of confidentiality of sensitive data, it might not be in 
the same location as the demonstrator and serve the needs of multiple hubs”.  
KPI 4.1 To develop H4C Marketplace with advanced matchmaking features, secure data exchange and at least 50 
registered users by the end of project; KPI 4.2 At least 5 advanced sorting lines developed, using digital tools, 
human/robot collaboration via Exte nded Reality (XR) and data analysis; KPI 4.3 At least 5 material parameters 
added in DPP continuously updated along value chain; KPI 4.4 To validate the sustainability of sorting mechanisms 
based on techno-economic, LCA, MFA; KPI 4.5 To develop a predictive resource logistics module for identifying 
potential business opportunities, risks or bottlenecks KPI 4.6 At least 3 smart bin placement optimization proposals 
produced that  
applicable to the region of Attica by the end of 
the project.  
KERs: 15 -
21 
  
  
SO5 To collaborate with local actors to create conditions for successful replication. Local authorities’ representatives 
of replicators will be closely interacting with Theseus and following project activities, preparing the ground for 
implementation of the activities in their regions.   
Theseus will establish replicators in Sweden, Norway: 1)Malmö, IS experienced, with special focus on topics 
related to the local Resource Hub to foster regional cooperation and innovation through technologies and social 
processes, applying a novel collaborative sy stem modelling approach by WECOS 9  project within same region, 
adapted for Malmö; 2)MO, to establish a regional I-US reference group, enabling a systemic approach and policy 
innovation during the project and after. The replications will enable mutual learning between the three locations in 
an iterative process, focused on promoting H4C through main hub’s innovations and policies. T9.3, T9.4 of 
replicators and collaboration with CCRI, will provide conclusions and recommendations.   
Relation to the call: “Plan in detail the replication and adaption of the concept, including the simulation and the business 
case and exploitation strategy of the First of a Kind hubs, in two to three alternative locations in close cooperation with 
the relevant local actors. The replication cases should be part  
 
9 https://mesam.se/projekt/wecos-waste-to-energy-wte-in-swedens-circular-economy-collaborative-system-dynamics-modelling  
HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-38         Innovation Action – THESEUS H4C  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6560347 - 17/09/2024 
Page 7 of 41  
  
10  Predictive resource logistics 
module  
of the proposal. Include local and regional authorities in an active collaboration to create favourable and coherent place -
based framework conditions”.  
KPI 5.1 Establish 1 replication case in Sweden and 1 in Norway; KPI 5.2 Establishment of a regional I-US policy 
arena, hosting 3 policy workshops; KPI 5.3 Trial study of at least 3 innovations from the main Attica hub to 
replicators; KPI 5.4 Replication Roadmap Tool tested  
by at least 3 new potential 
replication areas.  
KERs: 1-
3 
  
  
SO6 To facilitate implementation of the hub in the region and beyond, and to assure better acceptance of Theseus 
solutions, to enhance collaboration, to assure participative approach and knowledge exchange as well as future 
launching to the market.    
Theseus will include activities to enhance acceptance of its concepts, concerning active participation, education 
and awareness raising. Approaches for collaboration between diverse stakeholders for effective co-creation (T2.2, 
T11.6) to address barriers and identify opportunities within the local context. Theseus will provide tailored training 
and mentoring for upskilling decision -makers, employees, and citizens including workshops for co -creating and 
validating educational materials (T10.5). Special atten tion will be given to increasing social awareness towards 
sustainability and acceptance., thus AR technology will be used with gamification and educational functionalities 
(T10.4). Next, activities related to a set of guidelines and recommendations will be developed based on experiences 
and standardization. Common hub circularity guidelines based on activities performed by A.SPIRE to align 
ongoing P4P projects in terms of technologies proposed by H4Cs operating across Europe (T9.1), will be supported 
by Regional and Intraregional development recommendations and action plans related to integration of the Theseus 
H4C actions in EU, National, Regional and Municipal Plans (T2.4), Theseus will also provide policy guidelines 
based on MFA, health impact (T10.6) and  de-risking (T11.2).  Standardization activities (T11.5) will increase 
acceptance and trust for future launching on the market linking with the final group of SO6 activities, which are 
related to market analysis. In this context outcomes will be aligned wi th market demands to propose exploitation 
and commercialization strategy for feasible products and business models based on best practices (T11.3). Market 
feasibility and potential pathways for commercialization of solutions beyond project duration will be  studied 
(T11.4).  
The gender perspective and inclusiveness is considered throughout all project activities, ensured by WP1 and as 
described in 1.2.5.   
Relation to the call: “Favour participative management with the local community and study the evolution of the social 
impact of the hub, whilst also  
considering gender perspective and inclusiveness; Implement a social innovation action involving at least one of the local 
community actors and, additional actions to facilitate relations and to involve the local community actors e.g., exchanging 
knowledge with the educational establishments and developing flexible learning resources; Include a plan to extend the 
hub to additional players parties…”  
KPI 6.1 Diss & Comm and Exploitation KPIs fulfilled as per 2.2; KP1 6.2 Minimum 2 co -creation activities; KPI
6.3 Minimum 4 trainings performed; KPI 6.4 AR application shared with > 400 end -users to validate >4 targeted 
campaigns with immersive content achieving>75%  
acceptance of solutions assessed by >200 assessment forms; KPI 6.5 Minimum 3 
standardization, activities performed.  
KERs: 1-3, 22-
24 
  
  
In summary, the below concepts and methodologies, grouped by their common action field, will be developed to 
serve the 6 Theseus SOs:  
SO  Methodologies  WPs / Tasks  
1,5,6  Collaboration, Co -creative Activities, Stakeholder Engagement & 
Participation (related to social Innovations)  
T2.2, T11.6  
1,5,6  Social Awareness via AR app and gamification, XR for human-robot 
interaction (related to social Innovations)  
T10.4, T4.8  
HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-38         Innovation Action – THESEUS H4C  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6560347 - 17/09/2024 
Page 8 of 41  
1,6  Training and mentoring for upskilling (related to social 
Innovations)  
T10.5  
1,6  Governance scheme & capacity / RIC building (related to social 
Innovations)    
T2.1, T2.2  
1,6  Regional Science principles (related to social Innovations)  T2.4  
1,6  Replication and mutual learning between main hub and replicators 
(related to social Innovations)  
WP9  
2,4  Material Flow Analysis & characterization (and related more 
focused sub-analysis)  
T2.3, T2.5 (T4.1, T4.6, T4.7, 
Τ7.1)  
2,4  Digital modules supporting the implementation and optimization of 
the symbiotic flows: GIS map, DPP, Matchmaking, Predictive 
resource logistics module   
WP3  
2,4,6  Territorial Metabolism Water-Energy-Materials-Waste  Nexus Tool  Τ10.2   
2,4, 6  Climate Change integrated assessment models  T10.1  
2,4, 6  Cities Climate models and evaluation of environmental and 
economic impacts via LCA, Dynamic LCA , LCC  
T10.3  
2,4, 6  Impact Assessments of Flows  T8.7  
1,6  Commercialization strategy, business models and market analysis  T11.3, T11.4  
1,6  Health Benefits and Impact Analysis (social Innovations)  T10.6  
1,6  Risk analysis & De-Risking activities  T10.7,  T11.2  
1,6  Standardization activities, Policy recommendations  T11.5, T11.2  
  
  
1.1.2  Ambition  
Theseus ambition is summarized in the below 5 Innovation Pillars (IPs). The related Innovations to be developed 
per IP so the project will achieve the main and the special objectives, are described below.  
2.1.2.1. Innovations per THESEUS Innovation Pillars & relevant Tasks/KERs:  
ΙP1 Collaboration & ΙP2 Governance (A, B sub-innovations) 
  contribute to SO1, SO5, SO6  
Α)Collaboration between different sites, replicators, regions, existing initiatives/projects, stakeholders & society  
SoA: H4C Community of Practice (CoP) offers network, knowledge and assessment tools for H4C & I-US to cover 
the gap between different sites and initiatives. Results are not systematically exploited by next projects resulting in 
separated or duplicated efforts.  Regions successful in I -US are characterized by ambitious policy, alignment, 
proximity between diverse organizations, but also by internal drivers: economic benefits, environmental 
responsibility, stakeholder pressure for sustainable practices and regulatory restrictions e.g. Kalundborg. A known 
challenge is public and private sectors alignment, crucial for policy development and I -US innovations. MO 
(replicator) has seen innovative successful collaboration between public, private and research sectors based on 
smart specialisation and industrial cluster models e.g. ACT (host KPH, 106orgs) facilitating interactions of energy, 
water, and material between. Helsingborg (Malmo replicator area) has a history of I-US participatory processes for 
Waste/Energy in WECOS12.   
Beyond: H4C-CoP ideas enhanced by A.SPIRE into a methodology for knowledge exchange, a digital I -US 
community hub will be developed, including marketplace and repository for knowledge exchange, to support 
effective collaboration of all the stakeholders and different areas and integrate, enhance and validate solutions (e.g. 
digital or physical testbeds). As Theseus baseline, I-US solutions from existing H4Cs (REDOL, IS2H4C) and 
CCRIs (CSSBoost) and upcycling technologies from W2W, DigInTraCE projects will be enhanced (by the common 
partners) and used. Theseus will provide proper tools to overcome the gap between different sites, public and private 
sectors, using experience gained from replication areas practices, from ACT and WECOS project. Theseus will 
adapt these existing strategies and align them to Attica needs, creating natural and organic symbiosis (I-US). ACT 
practices will also support reaching final users and stakeholders through activities in replicator and main hub. Based 
on this mutual learning between main hub and replicators, a systemic related approach and a social innovation will 
HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-38         Innovation Action – THESEUS H4C  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6560347 - 17/09/2024 
Page 9 of 41  
be formed during the project, enabling an iterative interactive process, to transfer and promote innovations, 
practices and policies between the 3 different areas.  T2.2 participation, T10.4 AR and T11.6 engagement will focus 
in reaching final users and en gage stakeholders. Implemented in T2.2, WP9, WP10, WP11, KERs 1-3. Synergies 
with DigInTraCE, W2W, IS2H4C, REDOL, CSSBoost projects  
Β)Governance Model towards sustainable Regional, Intraregional and Interregional development  
SoA: Several Governance Models and management approaches are developed at regional, municipal or project 
level to facilitate symbiosis and related operational and business models. Synergies are developed at regional level, 
but they are not long term, neither coordinated to multiply their impact, or aligned with other areas, national actions 
and regional, national or EU Plans. Systems dynamics (SD) models have been widely applied in modelling multi-
dimensional socio -economic and environmental issues of regio nal/urban complex systems 10 . Also, Regional 
Institutional Capacity (RIC) is recognized as a dynamic force for I-US enabling diverse regional actors (businesses, 
public authorities, civil society, financiers) to build collective (relational, knowledge, mobilization) capacity to 
address issues of common concern11.   
Beyond: Theseus will develop a Hybrid Governance Model integrating both regional development approaches and 
project management participatory and co-creation aspects, in T2.1, T2.2. An analysis of local /national strategies, 
along with regional science principles, will ens ure that there is interregional interaction and cooperation, 
multiplying the impacts of interventions, intra and interregional. Circular economy roadmaps (CERMs) 12 will be 
developed, as strategic blueprints including actions, initiatives, timelines and KPIs to measure impacts for CE 
transition towards sustainability (using innovative ML approaches to connect I -US performance with overall 
regional resilience13) focused on resource optimization, business value, exploitation, standardization and policy 
recommendation. RIC will be enabled, while SD models approaches from WECOS project will be also exploited. 
Implemented in WP1, WP2, WP10, WP11 KERs 22-24. Synergies with DigInTraCE, W2W, IS2H4C, REDOL, 
CSSBoost projects  
Developments  Key Advantage & Progress: Start SRL 
  Foreseen End SRL  
Collaboration Framework Guidelines, AR app and Replication Tool  KERs 1-3  SRL17 5 
   SRL 7  
Governance & Roadmaps Governance Model,  CERMs, Policy and Standards  KERs 22-23  SRL 5
   SRL 7  
IP3 Digitalization & robotics (incl. sorting) (A, B1-B5 sub-innovations) 
 contribute to SO4  
A) Marketplace, Matchmaking & Prediction Modules, DPPs & Secure data exchange channels  
SoA: I-US involves resource-sharing to enhance sustainability and efficiency. Digital platforms are pivotal in this 
by connecting businesses, identifying synergies, and managing resource exchanges efficiently. They are often cloud 
based ecosystems where industries interact and share information in real time, supporting traceability, product and 
material passports. Advanced analytics and AI on large datasets can identify opportunities, with ML predict 
symbiotic synergies. Blockchain is explored for transparent and trusted transactions. IoT systems collect real- 
  
12 https://mesam.se/projekt/wecos-waste-to-energy-wte-in-swedens-circular-economy-collaborative-system-dynamics-modelling/  
time data to identify surplus resources and monitor environmental impacts. Beyond: Theseus will develop 
innovative modules: sophisticated matchmaking for I-US based on existing efforts (Accelwater, Coralis, Sharebox, 
IS2H4C), dynamic DPPs (DigInTraCE), prediction, improved logistics, PRLM, scheduling, financial tools, GIS on 
MFA, LCA and TM-WEMW approaches. The modules will be integrated in the I -US Attica digital Marketplace. 
The platform (by IRIS) will include Natural Language Processing (NLP) focused on interaction of computers with 
human language. NLP systems often use a combination of linguistic rules and ML algorithms to process and 
understand language. Recent advances in Deep Learning (DL), neural networks, and large-scale language models 
have signif icantly improved their performance and accuracy. Infrastructures for secure data exchange will be 
developed. Implemented in WP3 KERs 18-21. Synergies with Sharebox, Coralis, Accelwater, IS2H4C projects  
B) Sorting and Separation Mechanisms for waste upcycling (combined with P5 innovations)  
B1) Sorting Algorithms and Robotics SoA: Current waste sorting advancements integrate AI sensing and robotics 
for efficient automation. Sensor combinations of Red -Green-Blue-Depth (RGBD), Near -Infrared (NIR), and 
hyperspectral imaging (HSI) cameras, achieve categorization accuracy nearing 99.95%14. Robots excel in material 
 
10 https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0195925523003220  
11 https://www.diva-portal.org/smash/get/diva2:1513638/FULLTEXT02.pdf   
12 https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0959652623042245   
13 https://www.researchgate.net/publication/369452237_Prediction_models_and_testing_of_resilience_in_regions  17 
https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2777/381211   
14 https://doi.org/10.1007/s10311-023-01604-3  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2019.06.035   
HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-38         Innovation Action – THESEUS H4C  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6560347 - 17/09/2024 
Page 10 of 41  
handling with commercial solutions achieving over 3000 moves per hour per robot15. However, challenges remain 
e.g. high costs due to absence of fully commercialized for automated operations, research focused on single-robot 
instead of wide scalability20.  
Beyond:  Theseus will introduce multi -sensor classifiers and multiple -robot setups to sorting lines to increase 
adaptability and automation. By  
developing tailored sub -systems for material recovery and seamlessly integrating them into existing lines, their 
capacity and efficiency will be amplified in a flexible manner. ICCS will develop, train and test new robust datasets 
in real conditions, to produce digital tools for mass flow  
analysis of urban waste, identify and quantify each distinct 
valorisation chain.  
 B2) Sorting of Textiles 
(Textiles T8.2) 
 
SoA: 
 15-20% of 
textiles  
are sorted within EU giving textile waste significant role in pollution and climate change. Sorted textiles have 
diverse pathways such as upcycling, reclaiming for reuse in production or repurposing for e.g. furniture, agriculture. 
Current sorting practice s mainly involve manual labour, lacking automation for efficient categorization by fibre 
composition, sizing, and pre-processing on recyclers' specifications. Challenges persist due to related needs (e.g. 
type, quality, condition) in a single process. Post-sorting, textile waste requires mechanical, chemical, or biological 
processing. The optimization of these processes, currently done ad hoc, can be challenging for continuous processes 
with varied waste compositions.   
Beyond: Theseus aims to automated AI classification and robotic material handling line to accommodate the diverse 
range of disposed garments for efficient categorization. This will accelerate sorting procedures and enable the 
recovery of textiles by fibre type, differenti ating between thermoplastic, non-thermoplastic, and mixed. Using an 
XR application, a human operator will collaborate with robots by optimizing the handling of complex textiles (such 
as unfolding). Theseus will also develop AI algorithms to  optimize recycling and degradation by relating critical 
process parameters to material properties.   
B3) Separation of MSW, Smart Bins (MSW T8.1)  SoA: Current practices for unsorted MSW leverage machine 
vision to effectively sort materials such as plastics, paper, metals and glass with accuracy rates often exceeding 
90%16. Nonetheless, due to materials diversity and inherent lack of industry-oriented datasets, difficulties persist in 
accurately in cases of contamination or complex packaging.   
- 
 
15 https://packagingeurope.com/news/ai-robotic-picking-technology-aspires-to-optimise-recycling-operations-and-address-labour-shortages/10184.article  20 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12008-023-01320-w   
16 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2022.02.009.   
Beyond:  Theseus will develop extensive datasets for precise waste identification in mixed streams, distinguishing 
contaminants and multi 
material items. Modular, multi-sensory classification systems powered by AI, adjusted to the individual needs of 
existing lines will be deployed to recover plastics, metal, paper, and textiles from MSW, extending to distinguishing 
specific plastics, such as PET, PE, and bio-based polymers. Additionally, multi-robot cells will facilitate automated 
handling. A mass flow analysis of circulated waste will identify optimal placement locations for smart waste bins 
in West Attica, enhancing material recovery rates  using tailor -made integrated separation. The project will 
collaborate with W2W & DigInTraCE projects for shared advancements. Human operator training during sorting 
will be optimized with  
(XR) improving accuracy and speed of separation for more efficient and effective 
management of MSW 
.   
 Typical recovery of metals from CDW involves 
automated processes  B4) Recovery of copper scrap (CWD/Industrial 
Wastes T8.3) 
 
SoA: 
 
HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-38         Innovation Action – THESEUS H4C  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6560347 - 17/09/2024 
Page 11 of 41  
that employ magnetic and eddy current configurations. Latest advances demonstrate use of visual recognition 
systems coupled with robotics, with instances exhibiting capacity to handle waste up to 30kg in up to 6000 picks 
per hour17. However, difficulties remain in accurately sorting metals by grade and detecting impurities within the 
stream and differentiating between similar metals or identifying hybrid materials.  
Beyond: Theseus will develop an adjustable dedicated sorting line, expanding W2W project pilot to extract metals 
from mixed CDW streams, prioritizing efficient scrap retrieval by precise grade -based categorization. Integrating 
adaptable AI-based classification and specialized robot manipulators aims to boost sorting accuracy and enhance 
metal recovery efficiency within CDW streams in a modular fashion without hindering the functionality of current 
processing facilities.   
B5) Glass bottles Sorting (CWD/Industrial T8.3) SoA: Glass bottles are approximately 18.5% of Europe's annual 
packaging waste. In 2020, recycling rates for glass have been promising, over 75% to undergo recycling18. Optical 
imaging sorting technologies such as vision, and spectrometry-based 
like XRF exhibit good accuracy rates in glass, effectively exceeding 
85%, for bottle sorting lines, but a notable challenge lies in 
identifying broken or cracked glass, crucial for negative sorting19, 20.  
  
glass sorting line to manage glass waste originating from Athenian Brewery. The modular sorter will support the 
current bottle handling line without negative impacts and its function will centre around recycling used bottles and 
broken glass using a multi -sensing approach that employs data fusion from machine vision and hyperspectral 
imaging. This initiative also holds potential synergies with W2W, within the context of CDW management. B1)-
B5) Implemented in Task WP4 KERs 15-18. Synergies with DigInTraCE, REDOL, W2W, ACT UK projects  
Developments  Key Advantage & Progress – Start TRL 
  Foreseen End TRL  
Urban sorters Automated textiles separation and sorting for mixed waste & plastics and XR app  KERs 14-18   
TRL5
 7 Industrial sorters Glass/copper & metals sorting system  KERs 17   TRL5
 7  
IP4 Symbiotic flows (water / energy) (A, B sub-innovations) 
  contribute to SO3  
A) Energy reuse and valorisation  
SoA: Solar thermal technology for District Heating (DH) has been evolving to provide efficient and sustainable 
solutions for community needs. Integration of solar thermal systems with existing DH allows a gradual transition 
to renewable energy (decarbonisation). The High  
vacuum Flat Panels (HVFP) solar thermal 
technology is a highly innovative non -
concentrated technology which exhibits 
minimal thermal losses, no degradation over 
time, and exceptional lifetime. TVP has 
developed, patented and SolarKeyMark 
certified first ge neration of HVFP (branded 
as ‘MT -Power’). Several technological 
innovations like the metal-to-glass seal  
Figure 1 Certified data comparison and self-regenerative getter pump ensure that high vacuum Figure 2 TVP’s HVFP solar thermal 
collector is retained over 25 years, and make panels nearly 100% recyclable. HVFPs, capturing direct and diffuse solar 
irradiation, outperform (can  
exceed 50%) any other collector in efficiency at low-to-medium temperature range.21 HVFPs can deliver 
relatively high temperature (80- 
110C) during winter. TVP has developed the next generation of HVFPs (branded as “HT-Power”, up to 250C, 
stagnation >350C)22 thanks  
 
17 Zen Robotics, https://www.terex.com/zenrobotics/  
18 https://www.statista.com/statistics/1258851/glass-recycling-rate-in-europe/   
19 https://doi.org/10.3389/frsus.2022.901885   
20 Redwave X-Stream Glass https://redwave.com/en/loesungen/recycling/glass   
21 https://doi.org/10.1364/OE.26.00A480   
22 Overall absorber performances: efficiency 60% at 250°C (current value 45% at 250°C); 25 years of operation with <5% degradati on. Relevant publications: 28 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0927024822001702?via%3Dihub    
Beyond: Theseus will establish a tailor -made, 
automated  
HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-38         Innovation Action – THESEUS H4C  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6560347 - 17/09/2024 
Page 12 of 41  
to a new Selective Solar Absorber (SSA)28. Related RTD has been carried out under ESSteam23 (60m2 pilot, TRL6 
by 6/24). The new panel will provide highly efficient solar cooling coupled with double -effect absorption chillers 
and can generate low-pressure steam for industrial  
processes. Solar systems with 1st gen TVP’s are used in DHs in Switzerland (800m2 2020), Netherlands (48.000m2 
2024); Germany (6.000m2 2023). Industrial applications are running in Brazil, France, Italy, while solar thermal 
cooling in Spain and Kuwait.  
 Beyond: Theseus will demonstrate a SDHC solution of 2nd gen HVFPs in dual mode: heating during winter (Oct-
Apr) and cooling during summer for carbon -free tertiary, industrial / residential applications in line with local 
decarbonisation strategies. TVP will improve SDHC 2nd generation panels: (i) Model, simulate and assess potential 
configurations (incl. cold storage) for optimal heating & cooling. (ii) Selection of the suitable (double effect) 
absorption chiller; (iii) Develop appropriate control systems for the dual operation, dynamically based on weather 
and performance; (iv) Study replication cases for cascade scenarios with or without waste heat; (v) Elaborate on 
Heat-as-a-Service (HaaS) and Cold -as-a-Service (CaaS) business models towards replication  and scale -up to 
maximize socio -economic and environmental impact; achieving a Levelised Cost of Heat 40 -60 €/MWh. 2425 . 
Implemented in WP6, Task 8.4 producing KERs 13-14. Synergies with EVELIXIA Coralis projects  
B) Centralized and decentralized management and valorization of non-conventional water sources  
SoA: Significant strides have been made over the last few years towards the sustainable management and 
valorisation of non -conventional water sources which include among others wastewater, rainwater stormwater. 
Notable progress includes the upgrade of central WWTPs to produce adequate quality reclaimed water in alignment 
with the recent Water Reuse Regulation (2020/741), the development of innovative decentralized reclaimed water 
reuse systems, like those based on sewer mining concepts for treating wastewat er as evidenced in projects like 
H2020 NextGen and IMPETUS. Additionally, the emergence of decentralized Nature -Based Solutions (NBS) to 
manage and valorise non- 
conventional water sources (such as those developed in HYDROUSA, CARDIMED), particularly in urban settings, 
exemplifies an innovative approach to circular water flows, simultaneously contributing to climate change 
adaptation (flood/drought) and augmenting water  
availability for various uses. Furthermore, thermal treatment processes (drying, incineration) for the management 
of sewage sludge have been  
applied at large scale in the two largest WWTPs of Greece (Psyttalia and Syndos) However, technical limitations 
for these circular systems, socioeconomic constraints, insufficient investments and regulatory compliance often 
block the initial setup costs, while recent increases in  
energy prices challenge their operational and maintenance costs. The integration of the decentralised systems with 
existing centralized infrastructure poses several technical, administrative, logistical, and financial challenges. 
Scaling up these solutions to serve larger populations remains an obstacle, especially in densely populated urban 
areas. Maintenance and sustainability issues are still not fully addressed, and there is a lack of well-defined business 
models and financial frameworks for water service providers. Centralised wastewater systems can also play a key 
role as sources of reused water in bulk but consume more energy than conventional water supply systems. 
Moreover, the risk associated with the consumption of crops irrigated with reclaimed water needs to be evaluated 
on a case -by-case basis. The processes of dewatered sewage sludge drying and incineration suffer from high 
CAPEX and OPEX, while land application can be problematic or even impossible in urban settings. Consequently, 
finding alternative pathways for sewage sludge valorisation is necessary.   
 Beyond:  Theseus will go beyond the current SOTA by integrating and valorising non-conventional water flows into 
circular and symbiotic  
 
 value chains by coordinating the adoption of innovative centralized and decentralized solutions at city and regional 
scales also considering the process by -products. This will be achieved by analysing non -domestic water flows in 
Attica, focusing on sectors with high water demand and by aligning these demands with EU standards, we ensure 
both compliance and efficient water use. The benefits of centralized reclaimed water reuse in agriculture will be 
l  
,  
 
23 http://essteam-project.eu/   
24 https://solarheateurope.eu/2023/02/28/solar-district-heating-plant-in-geneva-230-tons-of-co2-saved-and-over-1-gwh-thermal-energy-produced-in-2-years/   
25 https://solarthermalworld.org/news/37-mw-solar-district-heating-plant-in-the-netherlands-with-outstanding-features/   

HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-38         Innovation Action – THESEUS H4C  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6560347 - 17/09/2024 
Page 13 of 41  
scientifically assessed focusing on the effect on soil (soil health – biodiversity) and crops (benefits of fertigation) 
and the risk of crops consumption will be evaluated focusing on the fate of emerging contaminants other chemicals 
and pathogens. A principa innovation is the use of decentralized water reuse practices, employing sewer mining 
technology to repurpose reclaimed water for irrigation which is both operationally efficient and adaptable to various 
urban contexts. Additionally, we will assess the cost-effectiveness and sustainability of these systems, in line with 
regulatory requirements. The project also integrates NBS for water recovery in urban areas enhancing water 
availability and reducing flood risks and supporting urban farming practices. In  parallel, we will implement the 
nove processes of fast pyrolysis and torrefaction to recover both energy and high added value products from sewage 
sludge, fostering significan improvements in energy efficiency and circularity for centralized WWTPs. Importantly 
the project will bridge the ‘gap’ between demonstration and large-scale adoption by co-developing with the Region 
of Attica, a Strategic Regional Master Plan for Circularity in Attica synthesizing insights from demonstrations to 
guide investment and align with regulatory frameworks. This plan will catalyse regiona 
, 
l 
t  
, 
l  
,  
. 
upscaling of circular water management practices 
and solutions 
 Implemented in WP7, Task 8.5 KERs 10-12. Synergies with 
HYDROUSA 
Accelwater, AquaSPICE, CARDIMED, IMPETUS 
projects 
  
Developments  Key Advantage & Progress – Start TRL 
  Foreseen End TRL  
CHP system H2 for production of heat and electricity through a CHP KERs 13   TRL5
 7  
DH system New generation of  HVFP solar thermal technology for greening DH KERs 14    TRL5
 7  
Water Sewer Mining System for Wastewater Valorisation KER 10 TRL5
 7; Centralized reclaimed water fertigation 
KER 12 management TRL5
  7; NBS for rain/stormwater harvesting and valorisation KERs 10,12 TRL5
 7;  Fast 
pyrolysis and torrefaction systems for sewage sludge valorisation  KER 11 TRL4
 626    
IP5 Symbiotic flows (materials) and upcycling (A, B, C sub-innovations) 
  contribute to SO2  
A) Packaging upcycling from MSW  
SoA: 1)OECD27 reveals globally a significant surge in plastic production (2m to 460m tons 1950-2019), only 9% 
of plastic waste is recycled, with nearly 50% disposed in EU, while COVID -19 has exacerbated situation. Smart 
packaging (SP) is designed to prevent or minimize  food waste, having challenges in commercial viability, 
regulatory standards, waste preservation, process optimization, recycling etc. to assess its overall environmental 
contribution28 . 2) Bioplastics are renewable, abundant, nutritious and safe for biosphere, sources of biomass. 
However, there are challenges such as high cost due, performance reproducibility due to their heterogeneous 
feedstock, intractable and exhaustive exploration to form sustainable solutions. 3)Significant advances have been 
made in biodegradable and compostable polymeric materials with applications in packaging and hygiene products. 
Widely used bio -based and petroleum -based biodegradable polymers include PLA, PHA/ PHB, PBS, PBA T 
certified according to latest regulations (e.g. EN13432, ASTM D6400). However, a main issue is the lack of their 
recycling as they are often mixed with other materials e.g. food scraps, paper, thus difficult to separate them29303132. 
New recycling streams processing approaches e.g. addition of additives, blending with neat/ fresh bio -degradable 
polymers should be developed, both addressed, boosting further the reduction of carbon footprint and cost of 
existing biodegradable plastic masterbatches (now at 2-3 €/Kg).   
Beyond: 
 
26 Techno-economic assessment of upscaling and operating a multistage pyrolysis reactor with a nominal input of > 1 ton of sludge/ day, along with the analysis of the mass and energy balances, thus a technology 
demonstrated in relevant environments.  
27 Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, https://www.oecd.org/environment/plastic-pollution-is-growing-relentlessly-as-waste-management-and-recycling-fall-short.htm   
28 https://doi.org/10.3390/polym1506148    
29 https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S004896972302065X   
30 https://doi.org/10.1007/s12221-012-0339-x https://doi.org/10.1177/0040517515603808  
31 https://doi.org/10.1088/2043-6262/1/4/043002 https://doi.org/10.1007/s10965-013-0105-9 https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00593  
32 https://doi.org/10.1007/s12221-012-0339-x https://doi.org/10.1016/S0032-3861(00)00250-0  

HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-38         Innovation Action – THESEUS H4C  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6560347 - 17/09/2024 
Page 14 of 41  
 1  1)Nanofiber films and micro/nano -composite powder with enhanced properties will be developed from 
recycled polymers. In the  
st case, the nanofiber films with encapsulated agents will be coated on conventional polymers for the formation 
of multilayer films that can be used for packaging applications. In 2 nd case, the produced micro/nano-composite 
powder will be co - extruded with conventional polymeric pellets to produce batches of enhanced pellets with 
potential uses in packaging, agricultural films etc. For this purpose, the electrohydrodynamic process of 
electrospinning will be used, a cost-effective and promising technique for fabrication of polymeric micro- or nano-
structured fibres, micro and nano-films that can act as coatings in several materials. It is an efficient and simple 
encapsulation technique in terms of versatility, flexibility and ease36, with green and safe processing under normal 
temperatures, without harmful chemicals. During electrospinning the polymer solution is charged with high 
voltage to be ejected to the collector. Towards its route, the solvent evaporates and the jet solidifies  forming 
ultrafine fibres, deposited on the collector37. Fibres’ have unique properties for exploitation in packaging, textiles 
etc38. 2) Theseus will develop a robotic materials system/platform automating synthesis and characterization of 
bioplastic formulations (100% biobased/ biodegradable) to develop a single-use biobased thin film and/or recycled 
plastic waste extracted from biomas s. AI planning software will be used for analysis in development cycles, 
iteratively learning from prior cycles and design and implement new material recipes based on user- 
  
specified performance goals. 3)The following biodegradable recycled materials/ formulations will be developed 
and investigated: (1) neat polymers, (2) mixed polymer powders, towards biodegradable polymer blends, and (3) 
polymer powders mixed in solid state or via a twinscrew melt compounding process with different (nano-)additives 
e.g. CaCO3, ZnO, SiO2 nanoparticles, etc., exploiting research by HMU in thermoplastics processing via melt -
mixing, thermomechanical recycling processes and physicochemical characterisation33.The cost of additives on the 
above formulations will be considered as a function of the potential increase of properties e.g. mechanical, 
thermomechanical, etc. to be achieved. Namely, the recycled based thermoplastic polymeric materials / compounds 
that will be developed by HMU will be tested by melt -rheology, DMA, DSC, FT-IR, GPC and tensile testing on 
dog-bone as well as on melt-blown film samples. Implemented in T5.2,5.4,5.5  KERs 5,6,8. Synergies with REDOL 
project  
B)Textiles upcycling  
SoA: Less than 1% of materials used in clothing is recycled into clothing at a global scale40. Mechanical recycling 
is the most mature option, with 20 % of collected and shredded textiles in Europe used as industry wipes, padding 
and filling for automotive industry and as insulation34. However, textiles cannot be recycled mechanically without 
reducing properties and quality. Chemical recycling is mature for thermoplastic fibres but not for natural fibres 
while mixed fibres is a challenge in recycling. The presence of dyes and certain chemicals in fabrics can also prevent 
recycling. Moreover, LCA show that chemical recycling has greater costs and contributes to an overall negative 
impact in energy consumption and environmental effects.   
Beyond: Theseus will develop a fibre -spinning process (melt spinning for thermoplastic or solvent/wet spinning 
for natural fibres) combined with encapsulation of active compounds within fibres. This will lead to novel circular 
high-value products, with desired properties (water repellent, oil repellent, antimicrobial, flame retardancy). In 
addition, to make chemical recycling feasible at industrial scale, Theseus will develop a glycolysis reactor with 
ionic liquids and supported by microwave technology, followed by post-condensation and spinning steps, represents 
a sustainable depolymerisation-polymerisation process able to integrate renewable energy sources more efficiently. 
All the above will be combined with the sorting activities described. Implemented in T5.1 KERs 4,7. Synergies 
with EXTENDED, ACT UK, REDOL, Textile waste refinery projects  
C)Innovative Construction Materials from CDW and other Wastes   
SoA: 1)Constructions is the largest resources consumer (35–45%) and 40% of global GHG emissions from material 
use. CDW is the 3040% of total solid waste. CE approaches in cement and concrete industries offer economically 
opportunities. Tailoring composition and  feedstock materials offers significant potential for reducing embodied 
carbon and energy of cement production. Concrete production is flexible utilizing an array of materials as binders 
and aggregates, thus a recommended option for repurposing post -use materials e.g. CDW, glass, fibrereinforced 
polymers, mixed plastic, rubber35. Βrick production from CDW is also important because of the detrimental effects 
 
33 https://doi.org/10.3390/ma14020466 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymertesting.2022.107545 40 
Ellen MacArthur Foundation, A new textiles economy: Redesigning fashion’s future (2017).  
34 https://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/BRIE/2022/729405/EPRS_BRI(2022)729405_EN.pdf    
35 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2019.117869 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2012.02.066 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2017.08.005 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.127180 
https://doi.org/10.3390/su13084113   
HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-38         Innovation Action – THESEUS H4C  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6560347 - 17/09/2024 
Page 15 of 41  
of bricks and ceramics in recycled aggregates from CDW used in concrete. Replacing up to 25% of the raw materials 
have been demonstrated at laboratory scale 36 whereas up to 5% ceramic waste are being used in some factories. 
CDW recycling is challenging due to variation in brick, ceramic and waste glass content, pollution level, chemistry 
and mineralogy. 2)Supplementary cementitious materials (SCMs), e.g. silice ous, aluminosiliceous, or calcium 
powders, are used as partial replacements of Portland in modern concrete, or as by-products of industries, e.g., coal 
fly ash and slag, or natural minerals with much lower energy input in processing, e.g., clay 37.  Alkali-activated 
binders and related geopolymers have been promoted as a component of the current and future toolkit of “full 
cement replacement systems”. The primary binding phases are derived by the polycondensation of aluminosilicates 
sourced from cl ays, fly ash, or slags, with an alkaline activator that accelerates the reaction process. Ongoing 
research emphasizes optimizing precursor utilization and tailoring and mixture formulations, exploring 
novel/recycled materials, assessing their long -term behaviour and integrating them into mainstream construction 
practices38.   
Beyond: 1) Theseus will use CDW in brick production, utilizing the whole fraction, combinations and waste glass 
as binder in concrete products. Environmental acceptability will be assessed for the new materials39. The leaching 
performance along with typical scenario will determine the impact (e.g. leaching to soil, surface water body and 
groundwater) for products in granular and monolithic forms for concrete and brick products. The aim is to quantify 
the leaching over lifetime. Ceramic, brick, and fines contents constrain the recycling potential. Theseus will seek 
novel insights into the cementitious activity of entire fractions of recycled concrete, glass wastes, etc., for their 
utilization as SCMs in blended cement and alkali-activated binders or related geopolymers for producing concrete. 
The performance of selected mortar mixtures, tailored for pre-cast elements and 3D-printability, will be validated 
in lab. Also, concrete recipes including glass will be tested at the ready-mixed concrete producer. The objective is 
to mitigate the environmental impact of cement and concrete manufacturing without compromising product’s 
economic and technical viability, minimizing raw materials and reducing emissions. Theseus will demonstrate a 
viable route for pulverised mixed CDW as raw material for brick production replacing local materials where 
feedstock contains min 10% of CDW and 6 -8% of ceramic waste. 2) The incorporation of high -quality and 
uniformity of recycled miner al woo ls from project partners promotes the development of high -performance 
construction panels with enhanced mechanical properties, durability, and sustainability. Implementing sophisticated 
methods (thermal or chemical treatment) can enhance the quality of rec ycled mineral Wool, optimizing reactivity 
and compatibility with cementitious binders and reliability in performance of the final concrete product. 
Implemented in T5.3, KER 4. Synergies with W2W, REDOL, DigInTraCE projects  
Developm
ents  
Key Advantage & Progress – Start TRL 
  Foreseen End TRL  
Packaging 
and fibres 
circular 
products  
Thin films, masterbatches and fibres from MSW and 
textiles  
(used in ThreacePoly and Panchart, as end users as per 
Pilots  
KERs 5-8    
TRL5
 7 
descriptions 
in section 
1.2.1)  
 
Circular 
materials 
for 
constructio
n  
Circular 
constructi
on 
material 
from 
CDW and  
textiles  
(used in KEBE as end 
user, as per Pilots 
descriptions in section 
1.2.1) 
 
KERs 
4 
 
TRL5
7  
  
 
#§PRJ-OBJ-PO§#  
1.2. Methodology #@CON-MET-CM@# #@COM-PLE-CP@#  
 
36 Dubale, M.; Vasi´c, M.V .; Goel, G.; Kalamdhad, A.; Singh, L.B. Utilization of Construction and Demolition Mix Waste in the Fired Brick Production: The Impact on Mechanical Properties. Materials 2023, 16, 262.  
37 https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CEMCONRES.2010.12.001  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cemconres.2019.05.008 https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CEMCONCOMP .2022.104885   
38 https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-matsci-070813-113515 https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CEMCONCOMP .2022.104885  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cemconres.2015.04.013 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cscm.2023.e02772  
39 Engelsen, C.J., van der Sloot, H.A., Kosson, D.A., Leaching assessment methodologies and regulations for evaluating the use of secondary and recycled materials in concrete and mortars  
HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-38         Innovation Action – THESEUS H4C  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6560347 - 17/09/2024 
Page 16 of 41  
1.2.1 Overall Concept and Scientific Methodology  
 
Figure 3 Overall Concept & Overview of Water Energy Material Flows and Pillars  
2.1.2.2. Overall Concept and Systemic Approach  
Using and combining the innovations described above, a story line per IP is summarized below:   
IP1 Collaboration (new & enhancement of existing) & IP5 Governance (regional & interregional development)  
A set of existing I-US practices, methodologies, technologies and tools from existing H4Cs, CCRI and IS projects 
and H4C CoP (connection already established thought common partners and A.SPIRE, CIRCE in T9.1, 9.2) will 
be exploited as baseline, adjusted and/or enhanced in several WPs, to fit and operate in Theseus. Successful cases 
and approaches will be transferred via mutual learning between the main hub and replicators. In WP2, LiU will 
design and facilitate the establishment of the I-US governance model, and collaboration structures between involved 
stakeholders, different sites, private and public sector and end-users of Theseus and of the intra-regional ecosystem 
of Attica. Detailed analysis of regional and national plans and materials flows mapping and characterization, along 
with territorial analysis of interregional interactions with peripheral regions, will support the setting up of 
projections and pathways to symbiotic flows and upscale to interregional and national level, thus multiplying the 
impact of interventions. Theseus will provide new insights to local, regional and national plans and develop among 
others Circular economy roadmaps (CERMs), setting up also strong basis for optimization, business value, 
exploitation, standardization and policy recommendations, regional i nstitutional capacity and overall sustainable 
regional development.   
IP2 Symbiotic flows (materials) and upcycling 
  T8.1, T8.2, T8.3  
Packaging upcycling from MSW:  Theseus' IP5 focuses on improving mutually beneficial material flows and 
upcycling initiative textiles, biobased materials, packaging, and CDW are all given special consideration. These 
material flows were deliberately chosen for their major environmental effect and the ability to successfully 
incorporate the main principles of the circular economy. This concept is well-aligned with both Greek and European 
environmental objectives. In Greece, there is a significant gap and scope for improvement in the manag ement of 
such material flows. Biobased materials will also be extracted. Theseus investigates cutting -edge recycling 
processes aimed to convert MSW streams into useful secondary materials (Pilot #2: Biobased Materials and 
Packaging Symbiotic flows in T8.1).    
Textiles: The current textile recycling infrastructure is still in its early phases, resulting in low rates of recovery and 
reuse, although this is projected to change soon. This project presents automated sorting methods for textiles that 
promise to improve materia l segregation efficiency, resulting in improved recycling rates and less reliance on 
landfills (Pilot #1: Textiles flow in T8.2).   
Innovative Construction Materials from CDW and other Industrial Wastes: While advances have been achieved in 
recycling packaging waste and CDW, there is still work to be done in upcycling these materials into higher value 

HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-38         Innovation Action – THESEUS H4C  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6560347 - 17/09/2024 
Page 17 of 41  
products that can revolutionize entire value chains and pave the way for sustainability. This gap underscores the 
need for novel waste management systems, which Theseus intends to address using cutting -edge technology and 
methodologies. When it comes to CD W the project focuses on developing sustainable building materials that 
integrate recycled content, so encouraging environmentally friendly construction practices (Pilot #3: CDW flow in 
T8.3).  
IP3 Symbiotic flows (water / energy) 
  T8.5, T8.4  
Water: Theseus, we analyse potential non-domestic water flows across Attica, industrial water needs per sector and 
quality, to ensure that demand, fluctuations, and uncertainties from domestic to irrigation meet EU and Greek Water 
Reuse Regulations and industrial requirem ents. Decentralized water reuse strategies will be explored, for urban 
gardening and farming activities. Innovative sewer mining systems will be deployed, to use treated wastewater for 
irrigation and addressing urban heat stress in Athens, aiming operational efficiency and sustainability. The long -
term benefits of centralized reclaimed water reuse for agricultural irrigation will be investigated considering the 
fate and removal of emerging contaminants and the impact of the fertigation pract ice to soil health and plants 
growth. Also, an extensive risk assessment will be carried out to showcase potential risks arising from human 
consumption of these crops. Theseus will also strategically deploy decentralised NBS for rain/stormwater 
valorisation within Athens. The approach extends to redesigning urban parks, incorporating rainwater harvesting, 
and pro-actively modifying runoff patterns, thus alleviating urban flooding and reducing stress on potable water 
resources. In parallel, valorisation of s ewage sludge produced in WWTPs will be addressed, by implementing 
advanced thermal treatment processes (fast pyrolysis, torrefaction) to produce energy and added value products. 
These will be integrated into Strategic Regional Master Plan in collaboration with Attica Region, bringing together 
insights, focusing on investment opportunities, maturing system designs, and aligning with regulations to fasttrack 
upscaling at regional level.   
Energy: The application of solar thermal technology to buildings of tertiary sector will be tested on site. Solar 
thermal panels will be installed in the ground beside CERTHs building in Ptolemaida to support to current area’s 
DH across seasons, for both heating a nd cooling purposes, by also installing absorption chiller replacing current 
electricity powered cooling circuit. The nearby Mpodosakeio Hospital will also benefit from the construction of a 
small-scale DH to cover heating but mainly cooling needs all over the year. Hot water will be transferred through 
an underground pipe to feed Hospitals current absorption chiller and provide extra cooling for surgery rooms, new 
medical sections, lowering carbon footprint (currently big energy consumption). The potential  of connecting this 
pipe with the central DH system of Ptolemaida will also be examined. The hospital is currently using cooling with 
roof solar thermal panels, trying to engage renewables and be transformed in the future to a green Hospital (zero 
emissions healthcare unit). Also, using green H2 (from RES) for supporting heating of CERTHs building will be 
demonstrated. H2 will be produced in a container outside of the building (from EVELIXIA). A study being 
conducted by CERTH (regional funding) for transfer ring green Hydrogen to Hospital for production of heat and 
electricity through a fuel cell system. Based on the above gradual city decarbonization could be achieved in the 
future.  
IP4 Digitalization & robotics (incl. sorting)  
HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-38         Innovation Action – THESEUS H4C  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6560347 - 17/09/2024 
Page 18 of 41  
 Theseus will incorporate 5 distinct sorting lines for T8.1-T8.3: Textiles: concentrates on automating textile sorting 
processes carried out by RECYCOM, aiming to streamline and enhance the sorting accuracy. Textiles from purple 
bins will feed a conveyor line. An image-based recognition 
module comprising of RGB or HSI equipment will 
categorize textiles into natural, thermoplastic, and mixed 
fibre. Next, a multirobot setup will handle and deposit each 
item into its corresponding co ntainer. Metals: will expand 
the capabilities of ICCS’s wood sorter in W2W. Setup will 
be based on Hal cor premises and will retrieve scrap metal 
from mixed CDW, through precise grading. Combined 
machine vision and X-Ray-based classification modules will 
detect specific materials, impurities and contaminants. 
Robot arms equipped with specialized grippers wi ll sort 
classified items in individual containers for further 
processing. The pilot will also explore pre - and post -
treatment (e.g. shredding, balling, briquetting) to seamlessly 
integrate with current workflows. MSW: will be 
implemented at TERNA facility in Arkadia region and will 
undergo targeted modular upgrades to refine the sorting of 
plastic, metal, paper and textiles, to optimize operational 
line's sorting capabilities through AI -driven machine vision and robotization, elevating both its efficiency and 
processing capacity, to sort and manage diverse waste components more effectively. Plastics: advanced recycling 
via negative sorting within a generic material stream from WATT’s Blue Bins. Enhancements aim for precise 
differentiation among various thermoplastics such as PET, PE, and bio -based polymers through HSI and Figure 5: 
Indicative proposed concept for mixed waste sorting  
DL. Potential synergies will be explored with W2W and DigInTraCE, for shared advancements. Glass: will recycle 
used glass bottles originating from AB. Used bottles will traverse along a conveyor line and will undergo a 2-stage 
categorization i)an optical sensor will detect defects and damage in the bottles ii)each bottle will be characterized 
by size and brand. Intact bottles will be grouped via a robot and forwarded for sterilization and rebottling. Damaged 
bottles will be recycled. Theseus will develop a Marketplace H4C platform: facilitating circularity, management, 
matchmaking, modelling and optimization and decision making, under secure data exchange. Several tools will be 
integrated:  
GIS tool for dynamic symbiotic maps: mapping and visualization of dynamic symbiotic loops, spatial allocation of 
activities, informed decisions; Matchmaking and symbiotic models: advanced matchmaking functionalities and 
recommenders expanding existing work and research. DPPs: adjustable for each innovative circular product with 
dynamically updated information. Informed decision taking within the supply chain. A mixed reality application 
creating value for the end user. Prediction of resource logistics: PRLM to predict material and water, to enable users 
identify business opportunities, risks or bottlenecks, while exploring scalability, replication opportunities.  
2.1.2.3. Scientific Methodology  
The main methodology is displayed below, indicating how existing knowledge, expertise and tools will be used 
from existing or ongoing  
 
4 
 
  
  
roposed concept for scrap metal 
  
  
 
  
  
 

HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-38         Innovation Action – THESEUS H4C  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6560347 - 17/09/2024 
Page 19 of 41  
 
H4Cs, CCRIs and I-US Projects, to Establish the Attica Theseus H4C, develop and validate the innovations and the 
replicators and prepare for upscaling. PM, Communication activities will be performed throughout the project. The 
phases are Definition M1-M8:  This Phase will set up the baseline and the frameworks under which Theseus 
consortium, project and the H4C will be developed and operate. The synergies, knowledge, expertise, tools and 
practices to be transferred from H4Cs, other projects and replication areas, into Theseus will be defined and 
prepared for integration. Preliminary studies will be performed in waste, energy and materials in the territory of 
Theseus. It is implemented mainly in WP2 and WP1. Development M9 -M24: It will design and develop the 
proposed technologies and innovations in terms of materials waste, energy and water, as well as the sorting and 
digital systems, based on the existing expertise and tools defined in P1 and they will be enhanced and adjusted 
accordingly and integrated. The pilot’s setup will be prepared. It is implemented mainly in WP3-7. Implementation 
M25-M36: It will finalize all the technologies and innovations, sorting and digital systems. They will be combined 
and integrated into value chains, forming the Theseus pilots will be developed and completed. In Parallel replicators 
will be prepared based on knowle dge from main H4C activities. It is implemented mainly in WP3 -7, WP8. 
Validation M37-M48: This Phase will validate Theseus pilots and complete the value chains with the testing and 
validation of the circular products and solutions. The replication areas will be also up and running. Proper refining 
will be done based on feedback from the value chains as well as the replicators. Assessments, policy 
recommendations and s tandardisation activities will be fed with insights from the pilot’s demonstration. It is 
implemented mainly in WP8. Replication and Upscaling M49-M60: It will finalize the replication areas, transfer to 
and from the main H4C knowledge and insights. Impact assessments will be developed for solutions and the pilots, 
along with final policy recommendations and standardization. The conditions for upscaling to other EU regions, 
replication and full exploitation towards commercialisation will be analysed and pro ject outcomes will be 
summarized. It is implemented mainly in PW9, WP10, WP11. An iterative knowledge exchange process between 
the 3 locations (main HUB and replication areas) will be active, though all phases.    
Materials Pilots Value Chains, Circular Products (CP), End Users (Pilots #4, #5, #6; via Innovation Pillars 2 & 4 
story lines) 2.1.2.5. Pilot #1: Textiles Symbiotic Flows  
Value Chains:  Textiles  
Coordinated & demonstrated in T8.2  
Used clothes/textiles collected from RECYCOM 
collection points (purple bins) within 
communities to ensure raw materials 
separation and higher quality of collected 

HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-38         Innovation Action – THESEUS H4C  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6560347 - 17/09/2024 
Page 20 of 41  
textiles. An extra source of textiles is from the 
sorting processes in Pilot #2, on which textiles 
are identified and separated from MSW.  
Separation in T4.4 so textiles collected will 
undergo advanced sorting & separation to 
categorize them based on fibre type, color, and 
condition (e.g. thermoplastic, non-
thermoplastic,  mixed fibres),  to 
 determine suitability for recycling or 
upcycling.  
Based on the properties of the textile waste recovered, 
the feedstock material will undergo an appropriate 
fibre-spinning process paired with encapsulation of 
active compounds, leading to the production of novel 
circular high -value products, with desired f ibre 
properties based on the application. Also, novel linker 
bio-chemistry will be tested to attach the actives with 
the fibrous materials, while the functionalization will 
be achieved using plasma treatment. 2 novel methods 
will be utilized to produce new  fibres: (a) a glycolysis 
reactor  with ionic liquids supported by microwave 
technology  
followed by post-condensation and spinning; (b) a fibre-spinning Figure 8: Indicative spinning process for thermoplastic textile 
waste stream process (melt spinning/electrospinning processes for thermoplastic or solvent/wet spinning for 
natural fibres) combined with encapsulation of active compounds.   
CP#1 Recycled Fiber will be processed to extract fibers suitable for crafting into new textile materials, focusing 
on creating a sustainable source of textile fibers, reducing the need for virgin materials.  The new spun 
fibres with antimicrobial COMO properties will be mixed  with existing packing material to produce 
mattresses.   
CP#2/3 Thin Films & Multi Layers will be created from recycles textiles and used as raw materials in various 
sectors, Tsimis including fashion, home decor, and industrial uses, showcasing the versatility of recycled 
textiles, in Pilot #2 ThracePoly  
CP#5/6: Bricks and cement from recycled textiles will be created and used as ICM. Recycled textiles will be 
incorporated into construction materials, contributing to sustainable building practices and reducing the 
environmental footprint of KEBE constructions.  The new flame retardancy spun fibres will b e used as 
secondary construction material in Pilot #3  
KPI 1 - Recycling Rate: >10% Increase in the percentage of textile waste that is successfully recycled and diverted 
from landfills;  KPI 2 - Reduction in virgin materials ‘use: >15% decrease in virgin materials ‘use due to the 
substitution of them with recycled textiles in product manufacturing;  KPI 3 – GHGs reduction: >10% in GHGs 
due to reduced raw materials use; KPI 4 - Innovative Products: At least three new products or applications 
developed from recycled textiles, indicating the success in creating value-added products from waste.  
2.1.2.6. Pilot #2: Biobased materials and Packaging Symbiotic Flows  
Value Chains:  MSW; Packaging, Biobased, Plastics  
 Coordinated & demonstrated in T8.1  Partners  
Mixed recycled materials will be collected from Blue Bins (mainly packaging recyclables) managed by WA TT.  
Recyclable materials in Blue Bins are a compilation of different materials with separation challenges. 
Indicatively, WATT general Greece’s MSW: paper 28.5%, biowaste (organic) 39.2%, plastic 12%, glass 4%, 
textiles 2%.  
Mixed recycled materials will be separated to with the sorter developed in T4.4 producing Packaging, Biobased 
and  
ICCS  
Plastics flows, as well as Textiles in 4 qualities to feed the Source of Pilot #1.   
HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-38         Innovation Action – THESEUS H4C  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6560347 - 17/09/2024 
Page 21 of 41  
CP#2: Biobased Thin Films of various biobased targeted properties will be developed using bioplastics extracted. 
 NCSR/Tsimis  
CP#3: Multilayer Packaging: An electrospun coating film with incorporated functional materials 
(antimicrobial and antioxidant compounds) that acts as the carrier of active compounds that will be 
controllably released can be incorporated in a multilayer conventional packaging. Thus, t he 
multilayer system will have enhanced physicochemical properties and incorporated functional 
compounds. NTUA pilot line is capable to prepare nanocomposites and fibers from carbon neutral 
materials with different functionalities using electrospinning process with capability of 5 kg coated 
film with electrospun nanofibers.  
CP#4: Masterbatches: Recycled biodegradable thermoplastic polymer formulations with the optimum 
performance and decreased cost set by KPIs in T5.2 will be shredded by HMU and delivered to 
PanChart for the film-blowing process at industrial environment, ending up “recycled & re cyclable 
biodegradable polymeric films” for packaging, bags, etc. PanChart will need for each batch of 
extrusion/ film blowing 100-120Kgr of pellet material with melt rheological properties to apply the 
proper industrial-scale extruder speed and film blowing process parameters. optimise them towards 
the best quality of the blown-film as well as trying to minimise the energy consumption of the overall 
process. The film produced will be tested by PanChart for its printability (e.g. for su permarket bag 
applications) and sent to HMU for mechanical (tensile), thermomechanical (DMA), DSC and TGA 
analyses.  
KPI 1 20% reduction time of material recipes testing for bio based thin films; KPI 2 10% faster creation of 
multilayer packages with specific attributes; KPI 3 at least 50% reduced cost of the recycled compounds, for 
masterbatches; KPI 4 10% increased tensile modulus and 25% strength for masterbatches  
2.1.2.7. Pilot #3: CDW & Industrial Waste Symbiotic Flows   
Value Chains:  CDW & industrial waste; Metals, Glass, Marble  
 Coordinated & demonstrated in T8.3  Partners  
CDW consist of dirt, sand, gravel, concrete, stones, bricks, wood, metals, glass, plastics, paper, and fabric, etc. 
They will be collected from civil engineering works (roads, bridges, sewers, networks, sidewalks, and space 
renovations etc.), as well as from AB their demolition, restoration and/or collapse; The collection of pulverised 
waste glass will be performed during CDW fromThraceM windows, glass doors, glass partitions, and other glass 
elements used in buildings; Collecting waste marble during CDW will arble be performed in collaboration with 
AB and ThraceMarble through effective segregation and disposal.  
CDW will be sorted dependent on particle sizes for an optimal reactivity environment to produce hydraulic 
blended cement or 
alkali-activated materials (AAMs)/Geopolymers (GP) as alternative precursors. Coarse particle fractions will be 
sorted and  
ICC
S applied as aggregates. Considering optimal packing density, reactive binder materials will be thoroughly 
mixed with different recycled aggregates and water/seawater to produce concrete blends.   
Freshly produced concrete blends will be combined with differently recycled fibres or waste glass enhancing 
circularity aspects  
TUD 
and improving the engineering and functional properties of the prototype of resulting insulation panels. 
Following intensive 
SINTEF mixing, pre-casting and additive manufacturing will be performed to produce insulation panels.  
On site separation on the premises of the plants aiming to increase the circularity in resources within the plants 
, improve the 
Halco
r usage of secondary materials and allow a total increase on recycled materials both for glass and copper. This 
is achieved through 
AB advanced separation/sorting and dedicated shredding for the copper.   
CP #5: Insulation Panels of Pilot #1 (Circular Product #2) The development of insulating panels based on selected 
binder precursors and aggregates and particular waste glass and wools offers an innovative system for high 
energy efficiency in buildings, used for both pre-cast and 3D printed elements. Based on the experimental 
results, the proposed panel will be investigated and compared to conventional insulating building solutions 
HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-38         Innovation Action – THESEUS H4C  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6560347 - 17/09/2024 
Page 22 of 41  
(e.g., rock wool, glass wool, etc.) considering not TUD only the thermal performance, but also considering 
other important characteristics, including acoustic insulation, fire Fibran  
resistance, mechanical strength, durability, cost, in situ installation, and eco -compatibility. To 
develop an optimal design of fiber -based concrete mixture for application in existing walls, 
different combinations of recycled component materials will be considered in the analysis.  
CP #6 Bricks with increased recycled content: CDW fines (and glass as a binder in some cases) will be demonstrated 
in the brick production at KEBE: i) Apply pre -homogenisation strategy to ensure stable chemistry of the 
raw materials. This includes laboratory mixing strategies of refined CDW to assess  chemical and 
mineralogical properties. ii) Based on laboratory -made bricks, refined CDW will replace 10 -50% of the 
clay based natural raw materials in the pilot trials. iii) SINTEF Each replacement level will be assigned to 
the product quality (e.g. strength, colour, water absorption, linear shrinkage, KEBE bulk density etc.) in 
order to document and classify the bricks containing refined CDW. iiii) Establish the maximum replacement 
level of CDW without comprom ising the quality parameters for most relevant markets (loadbearing and 
nonloadbearing applications).  
KPI 1 up to 50% of recycled materials in the end products; KPI 2 80% recyclability/repair ability of insulation 
materials in CDW  
Water & Energy Value Chains (Pilots #1, #2, #3; via Innovation Pillar 3 story line)  
2.1.2.8. Pilot #4: Energy Symbiotic Flows  
Value Chain:  Energy  
Coordinated & demonstrated in T8.4                                 Partners Innovative 
technology will be tested to a block of 2 buildings (CERTHs and Mpodosakeio Hospital). The TVP ,DHCP, 
CLEAN  
application of solar thermal technology to buildings of tertiary sector will be tested on site. 
Around 1600m2 of solar thermal panels (HVFPs) of 1 MW, will be installed in the ground 
~3000m2 (beside CERTHs building in Ptolemaida) to cover heating (support to current 
area’s DH) and cooling purposes (solar cooling). Hot water from solar thermal panels will 
feed the heat exchanger of the building (October-May), whereas solar cooling will  
 be applied (June -September) through the installation of an absorption chiller (~500 -
800kW) to replace current electricity powered cooling circuit.  The nearby Mpodosakeio 
Hospital will also benefit from the construction of a small -scale DH to cover heating  but 
mainly cooling needs all year. Hot water will be transferred through an underground 
insulated pipe to feed Hospitals current absorption chiller (distance 500m) and provide 
extra cooling for surgery rooms, new medical sections, lowering the carbon foot print 
(Hospital has big energy consumption throughout the year). The potential of connecting 
this pipe with the central DH system of Ptolemaida will also be examined to minimize 
heating losses. The hospital is currently using cooling with roof solar thermal panels. Using 
green H2 (from RES) for supporting heating of CERTHs building will be demonstrated, 
H2 to be produced in a container outside of building (deployed through EVELIXIA 
project). There is also a study being conducted from CERTH (regional funding ) for 
transferring green Hydrogen to Hospital to be utilized  for production of heat and electricity 
through a fuel cell system (mobile). Greening of DH of Ptolemaida will be gradually 
achieved (currently supported from operation of lignite thermal power stationsuse of waste 
heat).  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
USE #1:  Hot water of high temperature (produced by HVFP) will be utilized for 
heating and cooling purposes of 2 buildings (CERTHs building and nearby 
Mpodosakeio Hospital).  
TVP ,DHCP 
CLEAN  
USE #2:  Utilization of green H2 (produced locally in CERTH via EVELIXIA 
horizon project) for production of heat and electricity through a small fuel 
cell system~5KW (small scale implementation) for CERTHs building.  
  CERTH  
  
HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-38         Innovation Action – THESEUS H4C  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6560347 - 17/09/2024 
Page 23 of 41  
USE #3:  Implementation of a study from CERTH towards introduction of innovative 
technologies through RES for covering the heating load of DH System of 
Ptolemaida city.  
  
CERTH  
USE #4:  Implementation of study from CERTH towards Digitalization of district 
heating systems in terms of improved energy management and control and 
optimized energy sources utilization. 
CERTH  
KPI 1 annual heating energy production from RES (solar thermal) > 1500 MWh; KPI 2 annual heating consumption 
from RES in CERTHs building (for DH and solar cooling: 200-250 MWh, KPI 3 annual heating consumption from 
RES in Mpodosakeio Hospital building (for DH and solar cooling): 1200-1250 MWh  
  
2.1.2.9. Pilot #5: Water Symbiotic Flows – Centralized / Decentralized  
Value Chain:  Water  
Coordinated & demonstrated in T8.5  Partners  
 
Wastewater will be treated at sewer mining facilities for irrigation purposes to increase water 
availability and resilience of urban parks in the City of Athens. Reclaimed water from the 
centralized WWTP of Eastern Attica will be applied at a 0.2 -0.3 ha agricultural field to assess 
benefits and risks of fertigation practice.  Rainwater will be collected from rooftops and/or from 
surface runoff through NBS and other engineered solutions, both as a flood mitigation measure 
and for recovery and use for irrigation purposes in the urban and peri-urban environments at the 
appropriate time (dry period) to support farming practices. Sewage sludge from the Psyttallia 
and Metamorfosis WWTPs will be tested as feedstock to recover energy and materials.  
EYDAP, 
NTUA  
ADDMA,  
SusCITY  
 
Sewage Sludge will be treated by fast pyrolysis and torrefaction for energy and materials 
valorisation (biochar, biooil, gas). Decentralized system of Water will be developed in T7.4 so 
to decrease the pressures from water availability or for artificial recharge to protect the coastal 
aquifers from sea water intrusion and improve groundwater quality in general EYDAP, 
NTUA  
ADDMA, 
SusCITY  
USE#1: Production of biochar, biooil and gas from Sewage Sludge (T7.5)    
USE#2: Reclaimed Water used for irrigation of crops and urban uses (T7.2 and T7.4)  
USE#3: Harvested Rainwater and Stormwater used for green spaces and urban farming (T7.2 and 
T7.3)    
KPI 1 V olume of available water produced or collected for irrigation from decentralised systems > 80m3; KPI2 
Rainfall runoff volume decreasing from NBS in urban environments > 15%  
1.2.2 Replicators  
A) Sweden: Malmö is the 3rd largest city in Sweden, its region covering 1,347 km2 , 271,573 people. Öresund 
Region ( Malmö, Copenhagen) is home to 4 million people. Malmö was one of the earliest and most-industrialised 
cities in Scandinavia, with ambitious targets for climate neutrality and one of the EU Cities Mission incl 
NetZeroCities. Malmö have signed climate contracts with 200 companies, the present environmental programme 
was adopted by the Council in 2021. One important goal is increased resource efficiency. Increased consump tion 
is causing the Earth’s resources to be consumed at an ever-increasing rate, and Malmö must undergo a transition to 
a more circular economy where spillage and waste is minimized, and energy efficiency is facilitated. Products, 
materials, and resources must be fully utilized, re-used where possible and finally recycled. Malmö also has a Waste 
and eco-cycle plan with Prevention of waste, Efficient re-use, and Reduced waste flows. Sources and Value Chains: 
Industrial and urban residual flows and DH; residu al heat from DH production and industry, waste and water, 
textiles (Siptex, automated sorting), plastics – better separation from the waste streams, food etc. Main Goals to be 
achieved through project: Establish resource collaboration between actors in Malmö region including both private 
business sector and public sector and value chains. The goal is in Theseus to support the 200+ companies with 
climate contracts. Knowledge transfer and exchange between Attica hub and Malmö regarding technology, policy, 
business and innovation. Co-development with stakeholders leading to integrated scenario analysis and valorisation 
of Theseus innovations through a system dynamics model (WECOS). Co -develop decision support tool for value 
chain improvement.   

HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-38         Innovation Action – THESEUS H4C  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6560347 - 17/09/2024 
Page 24 of 41  
B) Norway: Mo i Rana (MO) is the second largest industrial center in Norway, located in Nordland County, 
just below the artic circle. The industry in MO stems from the 19 th century and today over 100 businesses with 
extensive IS (SRL level 6), employing over 2900 people, and with a turnover of over 1 billion €/year are present in 
MIP. At the core are 3 smelters, including a steel smelter recycling steel from the urban sector. The smelters provide 
products and by-products utilized by the urban sector: rebars, asphalts, concrete fillers and aggregates. Further, the 
district heating network is mainly powered by surplus energy and cooling water is utilized for fish farming. Through 
work in clusters, such as ACT (> 100 businesses from process industries and related value chains) and Concrete 
Innovation Cluster (CIC, >80 businesses), particularly IS, but also some I-US has been promoted. Objectives related 
to the replication: 1) Testing and adaption of methodology for systematic promotion of I -US from Attica hub, 2) 
adaption of Attica hub innovations to develop foundation (business model and plans) for > 2 I-US value chains and 
3) adapt Attica hub methodologies for geographically expanded areas. Sources and Value Chains : CDW: 
Management and re-utilization of CDW from urban and industrial building stocks. Plastics: Plastics sorted from 
household mixed waste and industrial waste collection points. Textiles: Textiles sorted from household mixed waste 
and end-of-life textiles from collection points. Water sludge: Urban sludge and sludge from on land fish farming. 
Main Goals to be achieved through project : Co-develop the CDW value chain with partners of ACT and CIC, 
including identifying logistic solutions, formulating business models, studying the effect of incentives and impact 
on sustainability; facilitate establishment of the other described value chai ns based on: adaptation studies, 
sustainability assessments and business model formulations for replicating main hub innovations in 1) MO based 
hub for circularity and 2) geographically expanded hub in Nordland. Main goals will be achieved under the guidance 
and uptake of a regional reference group to also expand on current collaboration models and policy for circularity 
(IS and I-US).  
1.2.3 Synergies with other national and international projects  
Relevant Objectives  Added Value in Theseus  
TEXTENDED (Horizon Europe), Dec 2022-Nov 2026, RISE  
An innovative I -US approach of discarded textiles with the 
development of a Blueprint, a knowledge -based masterplan 
for optimized cycling. Under same topic of REDOL H4C.  
RISE leads on the Sustainability section of the project, 
involving LCA, sLCA and LCC.  
W2W (Horizon Europe), Jan 2024-Dec 2027– ICCS (Project Coordinator)  
A comprehensive framework for multi-dimensional cascade 
valorisation of wood from C&D and furniture waste 
including sorting, upcycling and digital tools.  
DPP expertise, sorting and separation technologies 
will be used and enhanced by ICCS. The CDW flow 
of W2W will be used in parallel in THESEUS project.  
REDOL (Horizon Europe), Dec 2022-Nov 2026 – CIRCE (Project Coordinator), ICCS, IRIS   
Establishment of H4Cs in urban areas with zero waste 
policies by optimising value chains with digital tools.  
CIRCE will bring expertise from packaging, plastics, 
construction waste, and textiles.  ICCS, IRIS will use 
knowledge on H4C/I-US digital tools.   
IS2H4C (Horizon Europe), Jan 2024 – Jan 2028 H4C (IRIS, ICCS)  
An innovation workplan of H4C development in diverse 
areas of process industry surrounded by rural and/or urban 
settings.  
IRIS. ICCS will use knowledge on H4C/I -US digital 
tools, marketplace, recommenders and indicators 
measuring nontechnological hub impact.   
CORALIS (H2020), Oct 2020-Sep 2024 – CIRCE (Project Coordinator), ICCS, RISE  
Pathways creation for resource decarbonisation in energy 
intensive sector through viable IS approaches.  
CIRCE and ICCS will use knowledge for circular 
resources, monitoring and IS data sharing & 
management. RISE will transfer and adapt SRLM.   
SHAREBOX (H2020), Sep 2015-Aug 2019 – IRIS   
Secure Management for Shared Process for flexible energy 
and material flows.  
IRIS will transfer practices/solutions from digital 
platform  
ACCELWA TER (H2020), Nov 2020-Oct 2024 – ICCS, NTUA  
WaterEnergyFood nexus in food industries for effective use 
of resources.  
Water reuse practices(NTUA);AI & IS platform 
practices(ICCS) 
HYDROUSA (H2020) July 2018 – June 2023 – NTUA (Project Coordinator)  
HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-38         Innovation Action – THESEUS H4C  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6560347 - 17/09/2024 
Page 25 of 41  
Non-conventional water sources NBS valorisation, WEFE 
Nexus   
NBS in urban peri-urban environment; Fertigation 
using reclaimed water.  
DigInTrace (Horizon Europe), Jan 2023-Dec 2026 – ICCS (Project Coordinator), NTUA, CIRCE, IRIS  
A decentralised traceability platform for tracking, sorting, 
quality certification schemes, AI -based decision -making 
mechanisms.  
Separation / sorting systems and AI digital tools for 
circular resource valorisation. Expertise in materials 
flows.   
Autosort for Circular Textiles Demonstrator ACT UK (Innovate UK), Oct 2023-Sep 2025 - HUD  
A pioneering pilot-scale fully integrated, automated sorting 
and pre- 
Lessons learnt from this pilot facility will inform the 
textile case 
processing demonstrator for post-consumer waste textiles 
(ATSP).  
study.   
Textile waste refinery to produce recycled plastic, cellulose and dye (EPSRC), Oct 2023-Sep 2026 - HUD (PC), 
ICL  
A novel AI green recovery of polyester & cellulose from 
mixed textile waste.  
The outcomes in terms of optimized reuse of textiles.   
AquaSPICE (H2020), Nov 2020-Jan 2025 – TUC, ICCS, NTUA, HUD  
Materializing circular water use in process industries.  Analytics and process optimisation, Dynamic LCA. 
Material Flow Analysis.  
CSSBoost. (Circular Cities and Regions Initiative – CCRI, upon GAP phase), 2024- 2027 – TUC, ICL  
CSS lifecycle management services for monitoring & 
optimisation, and cognitive Digital Twin virtualizing 
regional/ interregional CE markets & ecosystems.  
Framework, methodology and tools for circular value 
chain management and systemic regional solutions.  
EVELIXIA (Horizon), Oct 2023-Oct 2027 – CERTH, DHCP  
Integration of DERs across energy networks, transforming 
buildings into active nodes of power generation & storage.  
Lessons learnt from adaptation of CHP from green H2 
to DH city system, optimized use of green H2 (Greek 
pilot) for covering energy needs.  
1.2.4 Interdisciplinarity and Regional Science  
To promote overall sustainability, systemic and regional approach, H4C implementation of I-US by cross-sectorial 
cooperation on new circular solutions, waste, energy, water and promote exploitability, Theseus must consider many 
different aspects and involv e different scientific domains. Theseus works in a strong inter -disciplinary field, 
involving expertise from various disciplines including natural and applied e.g. chemical engineering, physics, ICT, 
data science, electrical/mechanical engineering and economic and social sciences, e.g. regional science, sociology, 
economics, political science, ethics, law, business administration, communications, learning, etc. These are 
interwoven within activities and will be brought together and integrated in pursuit of project objectives forming 
inter- and trans -disciplinary conditions, used to develop innovations in different fields, and support policy 
influencing, standardization, business cases, exploitation and upskilling. Theseus will pursue the involvement of 
all regional actors to consider the complex requirement of the specific markets in terms of standardization and 
performance. Theseus recognises the difficulties of a trans -disciplinary collaboration (e.g., different language, 
terminology among different discipl ines and methods, different levels of scientific understanding and cognitive 
structures etc.) and adopts a proactive approach towards them by planning to follow the fundamentals of the 
Methodology in Interdisciplinary Research framework 40 . Consortium will employ a quality assurance process 
(T1.1) to ensure that all trans -disciplinary aspects are integrated in the solutions, thus creating a metaknowledge 
about all the different disciplines, methods and epistemologies, and purposefully and r eflectively integrate and 
synthesise different perspectives, to better understand and contribute to the new processes of H4C. Health related 
principles41 will be used to analyse the impact of Theseus activities to healthier cities for the citizens. A special 
focus will be placed on Regional Science to ensure that solutions contribute to the overall sustainable regional 
development, including resilience of Attica and peripheral regions and national, by analysing the intra & 
 
40 Tobi, H., Kampen, J.K. Research design: the methodology for interdisciplinary research framework. (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11135-017-0513-8   
41 https://www.who.int/activities/promoting-health-in-all-policies-and-intersectoral-action-capacities https://iris.who.int/handle/10665/342218   
HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-38         Innovation Action – THESEUS H4C  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6560347 - 17/09/2024 
Page 26 of 41  
interregional interactions, the position with other countries and EU, replication potential, synergies upscale and 
commercialization.    
1.2.5 Gender dimension  
Theseus will overcome sex and gender bias by disaggregating socioeconomic and biological differences between 
man, woman or other genders for inclusive research and innovation by integrating activities inspired from gendered 
innovations proposed by EC42. PM (WP1) will be engaged to gender issues including them in period’s reports. To 
overcome gaps (considering occupational and social status of genders) a draft study will be performed with potential 
actions within project to ensure gender -sensitive objectives, results, activities, partners assessment, management, 
indicators for monitoring and resource allocation. The motivation of these activities is equality and release of special 
creativity of all genders and individuals, creating added value for research, innovation and society.   
Proportionality and balance in research: equal participation of all genders at all project levels will be ensured and 
promoted. All partners are encouraged to increase women's and other genders’ participation in activities including 
management, research, analysis, networking etc. to assure equa l opportunities, recruitment and arrangements. In 
addition, there is gender balance in the core project management activities and in the principal investigator per 
partner. All partners provide equal opportunities on employment and participation in research multinational projects  
with special care to contributing lessening the disparities being a result of COVID -19 pandemic43 (e.g. flexible 
working schedules to parents of all genders according to their special needs).   
Scientific and linguistic bias: addressing in texts and material (e.g., personas) will follow gender-neutral language44, 
ensuring data, algorithms, digital tools, technologies and visuals are free of gender stereotypes. In all studies gender 
dimension will be considered. Focus groups dedicated to diversity and gender will be included. Collection of gender 
statistics employing AI and use of related metadata is also encouraged to identify challenges in policymaking and 
to better understand gender-specific needs, issues and gaps. Annotating source data for sex and gender will be  
  
ensured. Special biological and other factors limiting or exposing to special dangers and gender-specific risk (e.g., 
specific professions and activities) will considered. Gender participation and real influence will be studied upon the 
operation and the decision-making in the governance structures of Theseus as well as in the variety of entities and 
sectors involved.   
Equal projects’ results: Theseus ensures that new solutions usage (technologies, business models, processes, digital 
tools, etc.), access to resources and services and the related trainings, foster the involvement of women and other 
gender scientists in the future landscape.   
Equal dissemination: dissemination & communication in public, industry and business, policy recommendations 
and institutional regulations, will be addressed to all genders equally and adjusted to their needs.   
Connection with established gender activities & expertise: Theseus will seek connection with EU organisations and 
institutes, academia studying gender, national gender equality bodies etc. for knowledge sharing, participation in 
activities, provision of data in EU gender statistic database (EIGE), policymaking or studies. Existing tools will be 
considered into the project e.g. checklists (i.e., Yellow Window, IGAR) guidelines and research methodologies.  
 Gender equality promoting: Theseus focuses on gender equality to be oriented on the participating partners making 
difference within their workspaces. To assure full integration of gender dimension, a dedicated session will be 
shared, where general topic knowledge, all necessary in formation and guidelines (incl. gender -neutral language 
guidance) will be held for the partners and other participants , early in the project. Partners will be supported to 
implement their own gender equality plans.   
1.2.6 Open science practices  
Theseus will establish open science principles, fully aligned with the ambition of the European Open Science Cloud 
as a trusted environment for hosting and processing research data to support EU science in its global leading role; 
aligned to Open Innovation 2.0 paradigm 'as open as possible’ in the goals of Open Science Policy under Horizon 
Europe. Appropriate practices will be implemented in terms of coordination, monitoring, management, 
dissemination, communication replication, cooperation. Specifically:   
Research output management and impact to industry : research outputs available to dedicated target groups (i.e., 
authorities, sectoral, recycle, product and material associations, industry and businesses, SMEs, research 
 
42 European Commission, Directorate-General for Research and Innovation, (2013) Gendered innovations: how gender analysis contributes to research: report of the expert group  
'Innovation through gender'. Publications Office. DOI:10.2777/11868  
43 European Parliament News, Understanding Covid-19's impact on women (infographics), (2021)   
44 Papadimoulis D., GENDER-NEUTRAL LANGUAGE in the European Parliament, (2018)   
HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-38         Innovation Action – THESEUS H4C  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6560347 - 17/09/2024 
Page 27 of 41  
community, EU and global associations (e.g., ERSA & OECD45, Α.SPIRE/P4P (in consortium), DGs, SPI, Orgalim, 
EIT RawMaterials, CEN, CENELEC, standardization bodies, etc.) to be leveraged from results and ensure 
replicability.   
Early and open sharing of research results and data: 5 case studies publications in Open Research Europe, one for 
each of the pilots. Measures to ensure reproducibility of research outputs: providing standardization deliverables 
and  harmonisation of data of different fields, will ensure that research outputs follow common standards and 
support mainstream and widespread reporting and documentation methodologies.   
Providing open access to research outputs and Participation in open peer-review: partners are committed to use the 
Open Research Europe scholarly fully open access publishing service for Horizon Europe to enable rapid 
publication times and publication outputs supporting research integrity, reproducibility, transparency and enable 
open science practices. The project has dedicated budget for open-access publication to facilitate dissemination and 
reuse of results. Participants, for various reasons, may need to submit articles to journals (or proceedings) that only 
offer a lower level of open access, requiring either parallel publication or an embargo period. In this case, Green or 
Gold Open Access will be chosen depending on each publication. For green one, developers will deposit final peer-
reviewed manuscript in a public repository of their choice, ensuring open access to publication within the embargo 
period of max 6-months.   
1.2.7 Data management on FAIR principles and research outputs  
Theseus is expected to collect data in the scope of project activities and value chains to assess the technologies and 
effectiveness of the proposed solutions in real life conditions. All the data, available directly by partners involved 
or research results like models, algorithms, scripts, code and analysis, will be aggregated and anonymised according 
to visibility and security level defined. As for experimental measurements and datasets (raw, processed, logs etc.) 
of processes during demonstration, will be anonymised and secured in Theseus platform. Protocols and data types 
will be defined according to the needs in T3.5 and constantly monitored through T1.2. Publishing all data generated 
will be aligned with ethic issues and privacy in a way not affecting exploitation or competitiveness. Aligned with 
Open science, Theseus will make data not only “as open as possible: but also “as closed as necessary” to encourage 
collaboration across disciplines for solving today’s complex societal challenges. So, with respect to confidentiality, 
most of research data generated by the project will be made open and will be offered to the Open Research Data 
Pilot (Open AIRE). Theseus will generate research results and data with FAIR principles: Findable: with open 
science research described, proper identifiers e.g., DOIs and standards; Accessible: integrated to databases and 
expanding; Interoperable and Reusable: standardised, harmonised using common vocabularies, open standards and 
sharing principles to be easily adjusted and used in further research. Data will be maintained after the project ends 
for at least 2 years, so that the knowledge management will follow principles of discoverability, accessibility, 
intelligibility and availability beyond Theseus.    
1.2.8 The “Do not harm Principle”   
Theseus will ensure full DNSH Principle compliance with activities and expected life cycle impact of innovations 
(commercialized) contribute in a positive way and/or do not significantly harm any of the six environmental 
objectives set out in Art. 9 and 17  of the EU Sustainable Finance Taxonomy Regulation 2020/852. Theseus will 
apply a life-cycle oriented approach (validated through relevant LCA tool when possible) to ensure that proposed 
solutions are sustainable, in 3 steps: i) Identification of actual /potential adverse impacts during life  
  
cycle of project activities; ii) Prevention or mitigation of adverse impacts; and iii) Accounting for how adverse 
impacts are addressed by tracking performance and communicating results (ICT technologies will be validated with 
Green ICT principles). Activi ties are expected to have a direct positive impact to objectives defined: Climate 
Change Mitigation by reducing GHG emissions (use Rec 2013/179/EU or ETSI ES 203 199, ISO 14067:2018 or 
14064-2:2019 to calculate lifecycle GHG and net emissions), pollution p revention and control through waste 
reduction, identifying harmless substances and contaminants, transition to CE through symbiotic flows, whereas is 
not expected any negative impact to sustainable use and protection of water and marine resources, protecti on and 
restoration of biodiversity and Climate Change adaptation. #§CON-MET-CM§# #§COM-PLE-CP§# #§REL-EV A-RE§#   
  
2 Impact #@IMP-ACT-IA@#