1.2 METHODOLOGY ....................................................................................................................................................... 8 2. 
IMPACT ............................................................................................................................................................................. 17  
   PROJECT’S PATHWAYS TOWARDS IMPACT ..................................................................................................... 17  
   MEASURES TO MAXIMISE IMPACT .................................................................................................................... 23  
(A) INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS ..................................................................................................................................... 33  
(B) ACCESS RIGHTS TO BACKGROUND AND FOREGROUND IP DURING THE PROJECT .................................................................. 
33  
(C) IP OWNERSHIP .................................................................................................................................................................. 34 
(D) CONSORTIUM AGREEMENT 
................................................................................................................................................ 34  
   SUMMARY ................................................................................................................................................................ 34  
3. QUALITY AND EFFICIENCY OF THE IMPLEMENTATION ................................................................................ 36  
   WORK PLAN AND RESOURCES ............................................................................................................................ 36  
   CAPACITY OF PARTICIPANTS AND CONSORTIUM AS A WHOLE ................................................................. 39  
4. ETHICS SELF-ASSESSMENT ....................................................................................................................................... 43  
  
  
  
  
  


 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B         4 of 40  
1.  Excellence  
 Objectives and ambition  
BACKGROUND  
The 4th Industrial Revolution/ Industry 4.0 has 
introduced new levels of production capacity 
and efficiency. Industry 4.0 enables the 
reduction of production costs, maintains 
product quality and consistency and has made 
mass  customisation  economically 
 viable (Brynjolfsson & McAfee, 
2014; Schwab,  
2017).  
  
The UK  Industrial Digitalization Review 
Interim Report (UK Industrial Digitisation, 
2017) defines Industrial Digitalisation as: “the 
application of digital tools and technologies, in 
all their forms, to the v alue chains of 
businesses who make things (e.g. automotive 
and construction) or that are operationally 
asset intensive (e.g. power grids, wind farms etc.): it is the merging between the physical and digital worlds”. 
Industry 4.0 is a general-purpose technology, one with applicability in a wide variety of settings. It can, therefore, 
be expected to diffuse widely across all sectors of industry with positive consequences for whole regions and 
economies. Industry 5.0, by contrast, is concerned with leveraging the added -value that human creativity and 
ingenuity can bring to increasingly capable and accurate automation technologies.  
  
However,  industry  4.0  (in 
 particular automation)  has 
 been  plagued  by  the 
perception that it will lead automatically to 
job cuts, wage deflation and in some sectors, 
the complete replacement of the human 
workforce (Benavav, 2020; Frey,  2021, 
Barley,  2020).  Job  replacement 
 theory, however, shows no proper 
regard to the distinction between replacing 
and human augmenting  technology 
 implementation  
(Benavav,      2020,      Barely,      2020).      Full  
automation is appropriate where the only objectives centre around production efficiency, quality, accessibility and 
cost reduction. In contexts where innovation, flexibility and the application of craft and artisanal skills to production 
are either beyond the capability of automation or themselves  carry value in the eyes of customers, then full 
automation is inappropriate. In such contexts, effectively leveraging effective working between the human workers 
and technology becomes the key managerial and research concern. One might go as far as to argue that, because the 
profits from digital technology and automation necessarily tend toward zero as production technology inevitably 
diffuses to all competitors, that ultimately only creative and skilled human labour can sustain an individual firm’s 
competitiveness in the long run. It follows that sustainable competitive advantage is rooted ultimately in the 
 
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B         5 of 40  
competencies needed to effectively manage and sustain skilled human workforces alongside automated and 
digitalised production processes.  
  
AMBITION  
Digital technology through sensors, connectivity, and data processing offers more refined, extensive, and remote 
control over processes. It allows for low -cost real -time connectivity and automation between elements of the 
production process (Wang et al 2015, Wang et al., 2016). The ability to access manufacturing process data in real- 
time improves strategic and operational decision making (Porter and Heppelmann, 2014, Schwab, 2016) and so 
allows production to run more flexibly, reliably, and efficiently (S hrouf et al 2014; Hozdić 2015). Thus, adopting 
firms are able to lower maintenance costs (predictive maintenance based on wear data), reduce down time, are able 
to run processes at higher capacity with fewer staff, and better 
respond to consumer demands fo r product customisation 
(Zawadzk and Żywick 2016). Manufactures can themselves  
manufacture goods with integrated digital capability (Ayala et al., 
2017, Coreynen et al., 2017) which then subsequently yield user 
data that enable new services; potentially e nacting shifts in  
manufacturer’s business model toward service delivery (such as 
charging for functionality that can be turned off and on remotely).  
  
Thus, the application of industry 4.0 technologies will, it is claimed, continue to disrupt companies giving rise to 
new business models, innovative products, and enhanced services (Made Smarter, 2017) and the potential for radical 
transformation in supply chain relations (Langley, et al. 2020; Brynjolfsson and Mcafee, 2016). As such, policy 
makers see industry 4.0 is essential for future growth and competitiveness (see, for example, European Commission, 
2016; UK Industrial Digitisation, 2017), actively encouraging firms to pursue this as a way of fostering future growth 
and raise economies out of stagnation.  
  
The benefits of I4.0 will not come to firms automatically, however, and the particular strategic context of each firm 
will shape how they should app roach i4.0 implementation. For firms for whom the complete automation of 
production is not a strategic goal an I5.0 approach is appropriate. An i5.0 mind -set seeks to exploit what we term 
‘inter-augmentation’ between workers and i4.0 technologies. The prin ciple that pairing skilled workers and 
craftsmen with machines is a productivity and innovation game-changer for those firms that can master it. However, 
knowledge of industry I4.0 remains patchy in many areas of industry (UK Industrial Digitisation, 2017;  Made 
Smarter, 2017; Stentoft, Rajkamur and Madsen (2017) , studies of I5.0 are still in their infancy and detailed 
ethnographic studies of I5.0 are presently non-existent. This project presents an opportunity not only to identify the 
key features of the to pology that defines human -machine relations in industry 5.0 but will define the managerial 
competencies needed to succeed in this space. The project will link varied firm strategic contexts, technology 
implementation and detailed workplace ethnographies in a single research project.  
  
We address primarily the workforce implications of industry 5.0 and in particular the relationship between 
automation choices and maintenance of skilled work. We will thus address an under -explored strategic space in 
production - the zone where automation adds value to skilled and artisanal work and where further automation risks 
over-automation and undermining the value of what is produced.  
  
Our research will identify how the potential for automation and human input is bein g played out in a range of 
industrial, competitive and supply chain settings by creating detailed comparative case studies. We will use 
ethnographic research methods (shadowing, photography, observation and interviews) to identify the ways in which 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B         6 of 40  
job roles and content are changing as a consequence of the introduction of i4.0 and 5G technology. Following from 
this, the research will identify the shifting managerial capabilities that are needed to ensure the maintenance and 
added-value in these spaces, such that technology implementation migrates from a substitution to an augmentation 
approach. Therefore, our work will also support the preservation of cultural heritage in the form of craftsmanship 
skills that might otherwise be lost.   
OBJECTIVES    
We have broken down our ambition into the following objectives:  
Objective #1: Identify the nature of the different business, industrial and market contexts in which skilled workers are 
likely to continue to add and be valued.  
Why it is important: Automation does not simply, by virtue of its inherent nature, ‘threaten’ jobs. Nor do jobs carry 
inherent irreducible characteristics that render them automatable. Different attempts at classifying ‘at risk’ 
occupations have, unsurprisingly, come to wildly different conclusions (Frey, 2020). Our research will focus on the 
strategic, social, economic and business contexts in which it does or does not make business sense to automate 
skilled, artisanal and craft roles.  
How it will be delivered: Value stream mapping, linking to contextual factors, of skilled craftsman roles threatened 
by automation in each business context identified/used  
  
Objective #2: Identify how skilled and creative workers act to ensure their continued place in the value chain.     
Why it is important: Workers are not passive recipients of technology change, they also react to it. The history of 
technology change is replete with job roles that have proven unexpectedly resistant to elimination by automating 
technology  (Barley,  2020).  Railway  signalman,  for  example,  despite  signals  themselves  being  automated, 
maintained the existence of their role by expanding it to take on n ew tasks (such painting and welding). Recent 
experiences of digital technology and AI roll -outs also make clear that new human roles constantly emerge to 
augment technology that rarely works quite as well anticipated (Crawford, 2021).  
How it will be delivered: Identify individual, community, and organizational practices that enable role survival and 
adaption in the face of automation.  
  
Objective #3: Identify, and detail, good practices in organisations that continue to mobilize human skill, ingenuity 
and creativity as a source of value and competitive advantage.  
Why it is important: We lack understanding of precisely what managers and organizations do to better lever benefits 
from interacting human and technology resources. Brynjolfsson & McAfee (2014) i dentify the importance of 
distrinbuted decision making for taking best advantage of digital tecchnology, however we know little if anything 
about the detail.  
How it will be delivered: Good organizational and managerial practices identified.  
  
Objective #4: Examine the specific organisational and managerial competencies needed in contexts where skilled and 
creative roles meet autonomous, semi-autonomous and intelligent systems.  
Why it is important: Before the introduction of automation systems in a skilled crafts environment, both the 
organization and the managers require a certain level of skills to both communicate and implement the new approach. 
Therefore, there is need to carefully audit all the requisites at organizational and managerial level for the specific 
level of automation that will be implemented.  
How it will be delivered: This is expected to be industry specific hence a case study approach will be use to develop 
the general guidelines.  
  
Objective #5: Develop pathways for integration of I5.0 and craft skills for different case studies  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B         7 of 40  
Why it is important: This will provide the specific guidelines that can be used in the introsuction of I5.0 to the 
European manufacturing sector.  
How it will be delivered: Integration Guidelines and troubleshooting references  
  
    
Objective #6: Test the developed pathways in related companies  
Why it is important: This will allow us to verify our claims and potentially quantify the expected benefits for a better 
value proposition and establish a willingness to pay for the pathways  
How it will be delivered: Demonstration workshops for the respective companies  
  
Objective #7: Develop and carry out proper dissemination, communication and exploitation strategies to maximize 
the beneficial impacts of the project outcomes, ensuring a successful scaling -up and market uptake, to boost 
European industry competitiveness.  
Why it is important: This wil enable us to get the idea to as many European companies as possible. It is relevant 
to keep as many of the skilled Europeans working as possible for the embitterment of their lives and maintain the 
European way of life as well as in compliance with the SDG#8 Decent work for the citizens.  
How it will be delivered: Participation in industrial conferences and exhibitions on I5.0. Publications in journals  
  
Objective #8: Design of management training course content and course mo dules for I5.0 introduction for the 
management and the workers  
Why it is important: The successful future of I5.0 relies on the training of both workers and management to ensure 
that the benefits are well extracted. This is aimed at ensuring there is a place for skilled crafts within manufacturing 
while achieving production competences such as high throughput, quality and product consistency as can be 
achieved using I4.0.  
How it will be delivered: Training modules that can be implemented in isolation at the production plant or as part 
of an advanced manufacturing course or even MBA  
  
STATE OF THE ART  
The following table summarises the general state of the art about some existing methodologies in use or under 
development that relate to our project and how Up-Skill might provide benefits. Table 1 State-of-the-Art Analysis   
Alternative solutions in use 
or under development  
 Limitations  
(What is it unable to provide?)  
How our solution is better (quantitative 
and qualitative assessment)  
Replacing skilled labour 
with automated processes  
  
  
  
De-skills workforce  
Is  disruptive  and  meets  
resistance  
Demotivates  and  creates 
 an unemployment 
problem  
• Up-skills workforce  
• Is welcomed and accelerates the 
uptake  
• Is motivational and reduces an 
unemployment/re-skilling problem, 
particularly in the light of COVID  
Increasing  traditional 
training programme  
  
  
Is too slow to enable a reactive  
approach to demand Very 
high cost  
• Is rapid and responsive through the 
use of data  
• Is low cost  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B         8 of 40  
Reduction  in 
 high-value 
production volumes  
  
  
  
Loss of quality in production 
Tendency to offshore to low-cost 
production centres  
Loss of skills and products which 
retain cultural traditions and 
enhance the quality of life  
 Ability to retain skills and cultural 
traditions in a modern context to 
enable viability.  
  
This section refers to the now well established dichotomy between upskilling and deskilling in the literature on 
technological change and skill. It is well established that the worst predictions of technological unemployment, most 
recently popularised through discourses around automation and the ‘end of work’ (Benanav, 2020, have not come to 
pass. The evidence is less clear on how skills have been impacted, with some digital technologies having a negative  
 
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B         9 of 40  
impact on pay and conditions, and breaking unionized controls over skill (Woodcock and Graham, 2020) , whilst others 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 have been disruptive, but created new, often highly skilled jobs, 
though not necessarily going to the same workers. The broad consensus revolves around variations of the ‘polarization thesis’ 
that technologically led innovation generates a combination of new, highly skilled roles, combined with deskilled work and 
unemployment (Lopes and Calapez, 2021; Martinaitis et al., 2021). The higher-skilled roles rarely go to existing employees, 
leading to a disparity between the aggregated statistical outcomes, and individual or firm -level experiences. All of these 
approaches depend upon relatively static conceptions of skill determined by prior skill taxonomies in the industry, or 
qualifications, neglecting the ways in which skill itself is socially constructed and contested through organizational change 
processes (Warhurst et al., 2017). This allows a more nuanced understanding of skill in practice and in context, allowing a 
recognition of skilled work that is often neglected, at great cost to companies, a less expensive and rigid approach than large-
scale retraining programmes, and a maintenance of significant, strategically and culturally valuable skills, in a modern, 
digitally mediated business context.
1.2 METHODOLOGY  
The focus of this project is to develop a better understanding of how businesses, particularly in 
industrial/manufacturing environments, can lever value from human and machine integration. Businesses are already 
exploring how they can build business benefit from newly added capabilities such as big data, access to real time 
process data, IoT, automation, machine learning and artificial intelligence amongst others – the next step will be 
integrating those capabilities with human capabilities (such as creativity, ingenuity, artisanal skill).  
  
Studies of digital technology in the workplace have typically followed what Barley (2020) refers to as an isolationist 
approach - seeing roles as either replaceable or not. Thus, for example, Woodcock & Graham (2019) have referred 
to ‘digital legibility’ when determining whether a role is likely to be illuminated or not. Frey and Osbourne, in 
theirnow famous account of what roles are likely to be eliminated, used the content of the role to assess whether the 
role was likely to survive or not.  
  
Barely (2020) has suggested a more wholistic approach, one which instead looks at how the tasks associated with 
particular roles move between roles or even create new roles. Thus, we should not loo k at roles in isolation but a) 
look at the network of roles of which the role is a part and b) we should focus on the actual tasks associated with 
those roles and how they alter in relation to technology change. Barley (1984) talks about technology change 
reverberating up through the organization, from role to role and potentially, into the permanent structures of the 
organization itself.  
  
Alongside a focus on roles, role networks and tasks we propose two further methodological iterations. The first brings 
the role of the manager more sharply into focus. Not only does the manager and the management function play a 
crucial role in how technologies are used by workers in practice, but they may also play a key role in selecting the 
technologies that are implemented within the organization in the first place. Secondly, and relatedly, we suggest a 
need to account for the broader strategic context in which the technology implementing organization exists. Thus, 
the markets in which the organization operates may prove to be a crucial factor in deciding where the balance between 
automation and craft skill lies. For example, in some markets clear evidence of human intervention will be crucial to 
the value of the product or human intervention, such as in welding, may remain a practical necessity if the 
organization wishes to remain in markets that demand low-volume, varied and bespoke output.  
  
We thus a lso go beyond also existing ethnographic research concerned with technology and work by fully taking 
into account the business and strategic context of the organisation and link these, through managerial competencies 
to operations and the detailed organisa tion of work. While contemporary ethnographers of work and technology 
acknowledge structural, power and cultural differences between organisations and the importance of identifying how 
consistent the effects of a particular technology are across different organisations (Barley, 2020) neither he, nor his 

 
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B         10 of 40  
colleagues in the field of work and technology ethnography, (e.g. Orlikowski, 2007; Leonardi, 2013; Orr, 1996) pay 
attention to either business contexts or the role played by shifting managerial competencies.  
  
In our view, the business reasons for the adoption of any technology is critical to understanding how it is adopted. Associated 
with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
Thus, for example, Foxconn, the Apple Iphone assembly giant, has its workers sitting around tables assembling 
Iphones by hand from piles of components lying on the table. The automation technologies that could do this work 
are well established – and would barely count as innovation, but they are not adopted because they do not support 
its business model. The reason for this is partly low -wages, but it is also the specific business context in which the 
firm operates. To keep its products up-to date and allow last-minute changes Apple prefers the production flexibility 
of human hands (Freeman, 2018). Put another way, the precise nature of the business space in which humans meet 
automation depends on the broader business context as much as local organization and work-culture.  
  
We will also seek to provide a clear pathway to integrating skilled craft and automation by identifying the pivot 
which ensures that a business can harness both.  This will involve dissecting the roles of skilled  crafts and 
determining the level of automation that can be included in the appropriate positions. To undertake this, we will 
account for the context of each business through investigating what exactly the company does, its value proposition, 
its competitors, the nature of market it is in, the ways in which demand for its products is structured. We will then 
focus on the skilled craftsmen as the human component that adds value to outputs as automation usage increases in 
different organizational and business contexts. Therefore, we  will conduct our research with both managers and 
skilled / artisanal workers. The full scope of this work will enable us to develop I5.0 integration pathways for 
businesses.  
  
Figure 4 below summarises the overall steps we will use in this project to determine the input information that will allow 
us to develop the aforementioned integration pathways.  
  
Figure 4 Methodology Summary   
  
To deliver on our objectives, our approach will centre around the use of detailed ethnographic in combination with the 
application business analysis tools and techniques.  
  
Ethnographic Research Techniques  

 
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B         11 of 40  
It is important to see how work is actually done to assess how it is changing. It is notoriously difficult, for example, 
for workers to describe in interviews precisely how they do their work and what their skills are (Barley, 2020). It is 
also essential that researchers understand, as far as it possible, the technologies that shape the workplace. Similarly, 
business managers and leaders are often are not best placed to comment on the work of others, as the various business 
and performance drivers they are mindful of can prohibit clear, authentic, impartial assessment.  
  
We will deploy a team of researchers for the ethnographic analysis, with one ethnographer dedicated to each - industrial case 
region for the 12 month duration of the research period. Each researcher will be embedded in the  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
respective use cases utilising a combination of shadowing, photography, document collection, observation and interview. 
During the 12-month use case investigation period, they will carry out:  
• Role Change Analysis; this aspect of the research will identify the tasks undertaken skilled and artisanal workers; 
what is it now and how the role changes with the introduction of new technology?  
• Role Network Analysis focuses on understanding how tasks are re -distributed differently between different roles 
when new technologies are implemented as well as how communication patterns, loci of control and responsibility 
change. Also, what is taken on by others? What new roles are created?  
  
Role Change Analysis  
In our approach, we are seeking to clearly define the full breadth of what each role a skilled craftsman carries out 
entails. This will include identifying non-routine tasks, the level of autonomy of the role and continuous skill building 
capacity.  
In role change analysis, it is key to identify all the non -routine tasks in the role of a skilled craftsman. These tasks 
are defined as the extent to which work relies on the variety of non-repetitive tasks that cannot be easily monitored 
or codified. We will also investigate the shifting level of autonomy of different roles. – that is, the extent to which 
workers can decide precisely how and when to perform different tasks. This will involve also identifying the 
opportunities for workers to learn new skills and to pass on skills through training and mentoring.  
  
Figure 5 shows how a role can be constantly improved and transformed from delivering an intangible output to a tangible 
output after role change analysis  
  
Figure 5 Role change dynamics   
  
    

Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B         12 of 40  
This is key in mining each role to maximise its full potential by aptly positioned interventions.  
  
Role Network Analysis  
This seeks to understand technology affordances and how they will enable the transference of tasks from one role to 
another. The idea is to clearly define the key benefits of the technology at the company level as well as understand 
how it changes the interactions between co -workers and departments. This will also aid in defining what change  
brings value to the company as well as identify areas where the skilled craftsman requires training if the role now 
has new features. This analysis helps identify any dis -benefits of the new technology as well as any benefits that 
have not been identified and realized within the 
business. Figure 6 shows the matrix of machine 
affordance and perceptual information.  
• Correct  Rejection 
 implies  where automation 
has not been used at all and based on 
the researcher's analysis these areas 
indeed do not need automation  
• False  Affordance  identifies 
 areas where automation has 
been used and assumed to have 
benefits but does not.  
• Perceptible  Affordance 
 identifies areas where the 
benefits are clearly visible and 
accurately apportioned  
• Hidden affordances represent areas 
where automation can provide benefits but users are unaware.  
  
The idea of this analysis is to elevate all hidden affordance to the perceptible level while pulling down all false 
affordance into the correct rejection sphere.  
Business analysis and change methodologies  
The researchers will also have the following tools available to them, to supplement and strengthen the data collection 
approach while also increasing the value of the research to the case study organisations:  
  
Business Model Canvas  
We will use the BMC to identify how precisely the business creates value in the markets in which it operates. How 
value is created will have a direct bearing on how skilled work is perceived. So for example, skilled workers may be 
various understood within the business as a cost or an integral means of adding value. Automation and othecontrol 
systems may be seen as a means to help retain skilled workers (undertaking heavy or unpleasant work) and so as a 
means of attracting and retaining them or as a means of de -skilling, controlling, externalising or eliminating them. 
To help identify how the business extracts value from w hat it deems high-value skills as well as around what they 
rank lowly. This will allow us to dissect the impact of the skills on the overall business. This is key as often 
management is usually oblivious of their most valuable skillset.  
Technology Benefits Identification  
Technology implementation is always a risk to the business. Technologies in the form of capital machinery are 
(often) expensive investments and often do not operate as intended (Mindel, 2015). This will be implemented as  a 
workshop that identifies the implications of particular technology choices while identifying the requirements of 
organisational change to extract benefit. Workshops last half a day and involve managers as well as those working 
 
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B         13 of 40  
on the shop floor. Discuss ions cover the risks posed by the technology as well as the need for other actions like 
training, task restructuring or organisational re-structuring. The relationships between technology enablers, business 
changes, benefits and organisational objectives are mapped visually to foster open disucsion.  
LEAN 6 Sigma  
Lean thinking and analysis tools will be used to refine and improve how existing technologies add value to the 
business by identifying waste stemming from the present and planned set up of operations with a particular focus on 
integration with skilled craftsmanship and the total utility of the available automation capacity. We will investigate 
redundancies for both human workers and machines, identifying where either of them can better take control , step 
aside or collaborate to eliminate time and resource waste.  
Change Management Support and Analysis  
We will use our knowledge of the change management process to address potential problems that will arise as 
companies seek to transition to I5.0. This will include developing communication methodology to explain  
• why the change is necessary  
• what new values the individual need to embody  
• what are the expected benefits from each individual’s value shift  
• what guidelines need to be developed to maintain the new value system for the company  
• What are the necessary steps that will enable the realisation of the desired benefits  
Outcome Categorisation and case study selection template  
The outcomes we expect to see from the project fall within a sliding scale of impact from automation through to 
augmentation and digital feedback as defined within four broad categories which we expect to identify and refine 
through the course of the project. In each category, we are targeting at least one case study. The categories outlined 
below also give us a sense what the orginal strategic intent was in implementing any given process technology. It 
does not of course follow that the orginal intent of a ny given adoption strategy will be played out in reality. We 
recocognise that AAA ,in table 2 below, is a strategic intent that is rarely realised entirely in its purest form.  
Table 2 Outcomes Categorization   
 CODE  CATEGORISATION  DESCRIPTION  
AAA  
(e.g., Offshore wind 
turbine repairs)  
Full Automation  It is likely the job will ultimately cease to exist because it can be 
wholly automated, as and when equipment is available and 
becomes a cost-effective option  
AAH  
(e.g., Ship Building)  
Irreducible Human 
Integration  
Roles will be largely automated but require certain human 
intangible characteristics/intelligence/judgement which cannot be 
automated, and perhaps should not be automated  
HAA  
(e.g.,  Ornate  
Shotguns 
 and 
 fine 
watches)  
Strategic Human 
Integration  
These are Industrial -scale products, but must retain a level of 
skilled craft to maintain the quality of product and desirability to 
consumers  
  
 HHA  Artisanal work  A skilled craft, often an isolated artisan who  seeks to engage  
(e.g., Gold leaf Augmented with technology, where appropriate, to augment their craft and manufacturing) 
Technology maximise its potential market value and deliver efficiency  
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B         14 of 40  
Case study selection  
Webber – Webber, located in Germany, manufactures gas burners and gas-air mixing control systems for industrial 
uses. The manufacturing process up until now involves a lot of human skill (for instance silver soldering of fine 
precision tubes), which in these mode rn times is not part of the apprentices curriculum anymore. At present the 
company relies on skilled technicians to assemble burners, but their ambition, as they struggle to replace retiring 
staff, is to fully automate their manufacturing activity. Their ambition, at least, falls under the AAA category.  
Alfa Laval, located in Sweden Alfa Laval manufacture separators and associated components. The firm, in that it 
undertakes a variety of engineering quite different activities (different markets, different v olumes) falls under a 
number of categories. However, they are keen to advance their level of industry 4.0 capability and automate where 
they can. We therefore locate Alfa Laval as AAH.  
Ford, located in the UK has launched multiple Industry 4.0 initiatives  to support their business from the initial 
installation to the ongoing running of operations. However, there have been difficulties due to human reluctance to 
adopt and work alongside technology mainly due to a lack of trust. This issue also extends beyon d operations and 
into manufacturing planning where this case study is focussed. FORD have an automated method utilising AGVs to 
undertake the floor outlining process generating data and eradicating the risks incorrect install location. Additionally, 
post-install verification would be undertaken using a laser scanner onboard the AGV to collect data to precisely 
cross-reference against the planned location. However, PTME engineers are reluctant to move away from the current 
manual process due to a distinct lack of trust that the I4.0 technology could be incorporated successfully. This case 
study, would look to leverage the skills of the consortium to develop a suitable AGV based system that could 
overcome adoption reluctance and lead to lessons that could subsequently be deployed to improve the human AGV 
interface across Ford. Therefore, this project is appropriately situated at the cross-section of I4.0 and social sciences 
and is AAH.  
Helekopter, located in Sweden, offers engineering and business services to the engineering firms in its network. 
Their business model is to take on the administrative and financial burdens of those firms, using the latest 
management software systems, and so allowing those firms to focus on value-adding ‘engineering’ work. Helekopter 
does not seek to replace engineering workers but, in  effect, to  allow them to out -source non- engineering work. 
Helekopter thus reflects our HAA category, in which skilled human work is retained and augmented through industry 
4.0 technology. We will conduct research with Helekopter but also with appropriate firms with which they work as 
opportunities arise.   
  
Milan (Italy) region cases. Our Milan University partner will enrol a small number of small and medium scale 
companies involved in styling, de signing and prototyping industrial design products in a diverse range of sectors 
including furniture and furnishings, interior design and yacht design. The researcher responsible has relationships 
with such as companies like Cassina, Edra, Anonimia Castell i, Benetti. The work performed by employees in the 
case study organizations involves powered machinery in the making process in addition to hand tools. Although 
based on large scale production, the making process also involves a certain level of skilled cr aft to maintain the 
quality of product and desirability to consumers. Production still relies on direct human interaction and engagement 
with raw materials and manufactured products. We anticipate these cases will populate the HAA and HHA 
categories.  
RELEVANT NATIONAL AND INTERNATIONAL RESEARCH  
This project will build, where possible, on results of previous national and international research and innovation 
activities. The project will mainly take advantage of previous EU funded research activities on Industrial 4.0, Impact 
of technology on jobs business models and welfare, Automation and Work -Study, components performed in the 
following projects; - GrowIn 4, Beyond 4.0 and KYKLOS 4,0. Our project will also contact and utilise the 
developments of the EU fu nded project HuMan Manufacturing which is working on demonstrating ways factory 
workers and automation can operate in harmony, increasing productivity, quality, performance, satisfaction and 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B         15 of 40  
safety. Table 3 summaries all the key projects and research activ ities linked to the Up -Skill project and where 
consortium partners were involved  
    
Table 3 Previous Projects   
Project  Partner Involved  Relevance  
5GEM - 5G Enabling 
Manufacturing UK  
(DCMS – UK)  
TWI, FORD, 
LUN  
Utilising 5G sensors for data capture and analytics in 
manufacturing environment. The use of 5G in manufacturing to 
connect machines allowing real -time feedback, control, analysis 
and remote expert support. Two mobile private networks are being 
installed i n Ford’s Dunton facility and TWI Cambridge, 
respectively. Ford will focus on the connectivity of welding 
processes, used in the manufacture of electric vehicles. TWI will 
support Vacuum Furnace Engineering in connecting their heat 
treatment equipment. LUN will work on the associated challenges 
such as cyber security, scale-up, standards, machine learning and 
developing the 5G technology for an industrial environment.  
GrowIn4.0  ARU, TWI  Examining and supporting the uptake of digital technology 
amongst manufacturing SMEs in the North Sea region. 
Developing business models and tools. August 2017 to September 
2021.  
The Digitalization of 
Management. Funded 
by the Swedish 
national body FORTE.  
ARU, MDU  The project is examining changes in management practice as a 
consequence of digital technology – a comparison of Sweden and 
the UK. January 2017 to Dec 2022. Collaboration between ARU 
and Malardalen University, Sweden. The aim of the program is to 
understand the impact of digital technologies on the way 
organisations and work are managed, and the way organisational 
practices impact on how technologies are enacted. Different 
technologies are analysed, from automatization to virtualisation of 
work.  
DigiConCo-Op  ARU  Transforming Construction Network+. DigiConCo -Op: 
Transforming Micro -Project Delivery through Digital Co -
Operative Construction. ESRC CN+. Feb 2020 to July 3rd 2020.  
ROSSINI (H2020)  IRIS  Project Purpose: Robot enhanced Sensing, intelligence and 
actuation to Improve job quality in manufacturing. IRIS’s role is 
to develop a digital platform and AI algorithms  
SHAREBOX (H2020)  IRIS  Secure  Management  Platform  for  Shared  Process  Resources, 
coordinator  
Weldzero  (Innovate  
UK)  
LUN, TWI  AI   and   MI   used   to   analyse   data   to   ensure   defect   free 
manufacturing  
RESURGAM  TWI, LUN  H2020 – Industry 4.0 platform with MI and AI for control of 
FSW  
FSWBOT  TWI, LUN  Innovate UK – AI and MI to detect defects and repair.  
SafeFlame  EU  FP7  
Project  
TWI, WEB  Burner  development  for  use  with  hydrogen  for  a  hydrogen 
welding set.  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B         16 of 40  
The   Organization   of 
Craft Work  
UMIL  This project investigates aspects associated with the future of 
work and the impact of technological developments, such as in 
robotics and computing, that appear to threaten to eradicate the 
need for human judgment and interaction in many jobs. The 
project also explores the role of technology in craftwork 
organizations, the relationship  between  the body, the crafted 
object and the mind, and the importance of skill, knowledge and 
learning in the making process  
 
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B         17 of 40  
Craft Imaginaries – 
Past, Present and  
Future  
UMIL  This project investigates the social imaginary that surrounds Associated with 
document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
modern craft. It focuses on the relationship between the craft 
imaginary and authenticity that is related to the temporal character 
of craft in constructing past –present–future relationships. The 
inherited value of craft imaginaries resides in possibilities to build 
from the pasts and construct meaningful translations in the present 
and envisioned futures  
Several automation 
projects at our tech 
centre with partner 
companies  
MITC  Intelligent robotisation and automation projects in production 
processes and specific cells with eg Alfa Laval, GKN, including 
vision, sensors etc  
Several projects in 
visualisation and 
simulation in  
production  
MITC  Using e.g., HoloLens 2, Visual components, AI in the production 
process. E.g., impact on operators work environment  
  
GENDER DIMENSION  
The consortium partners are committed to the active promotion of gender equality and will fully comply with the 
European Union policy of equal opportunities between women and men. The partners involved in the proposed 
research operate equal opportunity pol icies concerning staff recruitment and deployment and will contribute to 
promoting gender equality by continuously encouraging and supporting women’s participation in all the areas of the 
project: research, development and industrial application of integra tion pathways to be produced at the end of the 
project. With this in mind, the project coordinator will assume responsibility for ensuring the participation of women 
at all levels of the project. In the consortium, some key personnel involved in the projec t are women. The project 
will make the best possible effort to improve the gender balance and raise awareness of the equal working opportunity 
for both women and men.  
OPEN SCIENCE PRACTICES  
All partners are committed to publishing the knowledge generated (as the main route of the dissemination) in 
scientific, peer-reviewed open access journals as well as in national and international conferences. In line with the 
principle of Horizon Europe explained in the Regulation and the Rules of Participation as well as through the relevant 
provisions in the grant agreement each beneficiary must ensure open access (free of charge, online access for any 
user) to all peer -reviewed scientific publications relating to its results. We shall deposit an electronic copy of any 
published version or the final manuscript accepted for publication of a scientific publication relating to the foreground 
before or after the final report in an institutional or subject-based repository at the time of publication. Beneficiaries 
will make their best efforts to ensure that this electronic copy becomes freely and electronically available to anyone 
through this repository: immediately if the scientific publication is published “ open access” (i.e., if an electronic 
version is also available free of charge via the publisher) or within 6 months of publication. All the future exploitable 
activities of the research outputs will be done under fair and reasonable conditions and will com mit to rapidly and 
broadly exploit the resulting products and services, as described in the Data Management Plan as well as in WP5 
(Dissemination, Exploitation and Communication).  
DATA MANAGEMENT  
Data generated during the project is anticipated to be in the form of research/ feedback reports covering both 
mechanical data and socio -economic data. A detailed data management plan (DMP) will be produced within the 

 
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B         18 of 40  
first six months of the project. This will enable the collection of data generated throughout th is project and will be 
essential for achieving any regulatory approval. Compliance with ISO standard ISO 15489-1:2001 information and 
documentation – records management, as well as the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) about the 
protection of personal data, will be ensured. All research data generated during the UP-Skill project will be managed 
following FAIR principles to ensure that it is Findable -Accessible-Interoperable-Reusable. Research data will be 
deposited in a ‘trusted’ repository and acce ss provided under the principle of “as open as possible, as closed as 
necessary”. The consortium will also comply with additional Horizon Europe requirements concerning the  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
bibliographic and administrative metadata that relates to deposited data. Confidential data (test methods and results) will only 
be shared within the consortium until the protection of the intellectual property is secured. Non- confidential information will 
be shared more wid ely at conferences and trade fairs. The data will also be stored on secure servers with remote backup, 
internal to the consortium members under the controls specified in their existing ISO9001 quality management systems. All 
data that is uploaded into the repository will be in the machine - searchable format and made freely accessible to other 
researchers using Creative Commons Attribution Licenses (CC BY), which spell out terms of use and how the data can be 
used by others. The data will be held for a minimum of fifteen years after the end of the project.  
The DMP will cover:  
● Types of data/research outputs: definition of dataset units to be produced during the project life span. Each 
data set will contain, at least the work package to which it belongs and d ata typology, with a short 
description.  
● Findability of data/research outputs: datasets will be stored on Zenodo, automatically becoming part of 
OpenAIRE, the EC-funded initiative supporting the Open Access policy. Each will be assigned a unique 
identifier.  
● Accessibility of data/research outputs: use restrictions and licensing information. Open Access will be 
implemented in peer-review publications, conference proceedings and workshop presentations.  
● Interoperability of data/research outputs: standards use d to describe datasets. Proper metadata facilitates 
the use of the data by others, makes it easier to combine information from different sources and ensures 
transparency. Metadata of deposited data will be open under a Creative Common Public Domain 
Dedication (CC 0).  
● Reusability of data/research outputs: the right to access and reuse digital research data under the terms set 
out in the Grant Agreement will be ensured. The DMP will include information on licensing of data, their 
availability, re-use of data, duration of data for re-use and reproducibility of research outputs, among other 
issues.  
● Curation and storage/preservation: The Exploitation  manager will  oversee data management, while 
quality control of each dataset is the responsibility of every WP leader. Informed consent in data collection 
and information protection in data storage and access will be considered, as well as procedures for long - 
term preservation of datasets.  
    
  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
2.  Impact  
 PROJECT’S PATHWAYS TOWARDS IMPACT  
  
Automation, digitalisation and other related innovations are expected to significantly change the nature of work. 
In future there is likely to be a surge in demand for some skills and a reduction in demand for certain physical and 
manual tasks. Understandi ng these shifts will help society, policy makers and business leaders find ways of 
maximising the benefits while recognizing and mitigating related challenges. The key challenges and opportunities 
created include.  

 
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B         19 of 40  
 Talent is currently underutilised and lab our markets are under strain – according to McKinsey, over 
285million adults are not in the labour force in the EU -15 countries and the US alone, and more than 100 
million of them would like more work1. Approximately 850 million (30 – 45%) of the working -age 
population across the US, UK, Germany, Japan, Brazil, China and India, is underutilised2. At the same 
time, over 75 million youths are unemployed. Moreover, over 655 million working age women are less 
economically active than men. Improvement in skill capacity utilisation across the board will contribute an 
additional €12 trillion annually to EU-GDP by 2025.  
 Many activities that workers carry out today have automation potential – MGI research on automation 
potential3 estimates that the automation potential for current occupations is less than 5%. Approximately 
60% of all occupations have a 30% technical automatable potential, benefiting highly skilled workers while 
enabling more productivity for low -skilled workers working with technology4. Globally (Chi na, India, 
Japan and the US alone) it is estimated that automation could affect over 50% of the global economy, across 
1.2 billion employees and €14 trillion in wages5.  
 Automation has the potential to help labour markets – Digital talent platforms have em erged over recent 
years and are intended to improve ways in which workers and jobs are matched6. Online screening 
platforms speed up the hiring process while cutting time individual spend searching for jobs. They have the 
potential to address geographical mismatches, putting the right people in right jobs thereby increasing 
productivity, however at present there are serious limitations within the keyword matching algorithms, 
resulting in a tendency to select out potential workers with transferrable skills.  
  
The ethnographic approach will enable us to build a unique and detailed understanding of the ways in which artisanal 
skills and automation interact and are managed in each of our cases. Precise ethnographic methodological design will 
be critical here in order to build detailed understanding of the products made, the technologies used to produce them 
and the specific human skills (both tacit and explicit) deployed to produce them (Barlely, 2020). Our approach will 
also take specific account of the firm strategy and managerial competencies that are delivering business sustainability 
and growth. The ethnographic design will highlight:   
1. The specific nature of the production technologies in use and the products being produced   
2. The specifics of the supporting infrastructure and inputs relating to production as it is presently enacted. What is 
termed the ‘technology stack’ (Barley, 2020)   
3. The specific skills required at all points in the production process and how they are distributed and combined 
across different roles. These would include technology -based as well as social skills (such as work planning, 
innovation, problem solving).   
4. The managerial competencies needed to bring both the material and skills elements together in the most effective 
assemblage or functional machine (Suchman, 1987) involving both artisanal skills and automation.   
The pathways to impact will delivered through the provision of a detailed understanding, for each case study 
organisation, not only of the specific skills required to deliver effective production within a specific strategic business 
context, but also what managerial competencies and firm structures are needed to ensure the firms competitive position 
and USP.   
   
Collectively, our work will inform the precise skills and characteristics needed by both firms and workers in a way that 
is contextualised in the actual conduct of the businesses we deal with. In combination, the cases offer a sufficient broad  
range of organisations as to be able to generalise about how we deal with  skills in relation to automation - not as isolated 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 ‘possessed’ attributes of individual workers but combinatory elements 
of entire socio-material production processes.     
  

 
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B         20 of 40  
It is not straightforward to quantify the overall impacts, not least in those cases where there is no counterfactual point 
of comparison. However, even a small benefit to European countries, reducing the potential of automation to generate 
technological unemployment and under -employment, would be significant. Widely cited estimates up to 47% of 
employment are in a ‘high risk’ category and ‘potentially automatable over… a decade or two’ (Frey & Osborne, 
2017), suggest that even a small impact on automation t hrough skill recognition and development in training will 
significantly reduce technological unemployment. Given a working population in the EU of 188m (2020 statistics), 
assuming a similar impact to that identified by Frey & Osborne would mean that up to 88.4m jobs were at risk of 
automation in the near term. Even a 1% reduction in that figure would improve over 884,000 jobs, reducing the 
potential for automation and replacement. If we review just the manufacturing sector, where automation risks are 
particularly high, the EU has more than 33.2m employees in the manufacturing sector suggesting at least 15m of these 
are at risk of near-term automation, with a potential benefit to 150,000 employees directly.  
  
UNIQUE PROJECT RESULTS CONTRIBUTION TOWARDS OUTCOMES SPECIFIED IN THE TOPIC  
Up-Skill will have wide reaching impacts which directly affect the evolution of Industry 5.0 and its implications for future 
work, and in turn European and worldwide industries and policy.  
The top-level outcome we expect to see from the project is the development of a quantified, predictive approach to 
the implementation of Industry 4.0 principles within manufacturing industry (in its broadest sense). Much work has 
been undertaken on the technology driven principles of Industry 4.0 (developing sensors, interpreting data etc) but 
comparatively little work has addressed the question of how to tailor the approach to a particular company based on 
an assessment of local needs.  
Based on our analysis, we have established that approache s fall within a sliding scale of automation and digital 
feedback as defined within the principles of Industry 4.0, from Substitution at one end of the scale (the role can be 
fully replaced by machine) through to Augmentation at the other (the human creative input defines the role but may 
be assisted in productivity by the use of machines without impacting the fundamental nature of the work). These 
have corresponding impacts on the needs for future roles. We have defined these within four broad categories which 
we will further develop and refine through the course of the project.  
  
(a) AAA – Full automation: the job will ultimately cease to exist because it can be wholly automated and replaced, as 
and when equipment is available and becomes a cost-effective option.  
  
(b) AAH – irreducible human integration : roles will be largely automated, but require certain human intangible 
characteristics/intelligence/judgement which cannot, and perhaps should not be automated. The business  
  
  
1 McKinsey Global Institute Technology, jobs, and the future of work  
2 Ho w advancing w o men’s equalit y c an add $12 tril lio n to glo bal gr o w th   
3 Harnessing automation for a future that works  
4 Four fundamentals of workplace automation  
5 The Countries Most (and Least) Likely to be Affected by Automation by Michael Chui, et, al.  
6 Connecting talent with opportunity in the digital age  
should cease to try and automate where it is counterproductive to its interests in delivering to its USPs, e.g., by  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
reducing flexibility or the ability to extrapolate between qualitative data sets, and in so doing to attach value to the role of the 
individual craftsperson.  
  

 
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B         21 of 40  
(c) HAA – Strategic human integration: guns,  watches etc… These are Industrial scale products, but must 
retain a level of skilled craft to maintain the quality of product and desirability to consumers. This often 
means introducing automation to the extent acceptable by the market in manufacturing at the PARTS level, 
but the finished product is and must be assembled by the skilled craftsman in order to retain the desired 
quality and desirability of finish. There is often a tension found here between the craftsman and the 
business, relating to the definition of the appropriate boundary between ‘machine made’ and ‘handmade’ 
which will be explored within the Up-Skill project.  
(d) HHA – Humans, artisans who see the value in using technology: a skilled craft, an isolated artisan who 
seeks to engage technology, where appropriate, to augment their craft and maximise its potential market 
value and deliver efficiency. This becomes critical to ongoing viability of a craft business, which has 
implications both for the individual craftsman and for retention of heritage skills where without automation 
or business potential the skills will be lost due to failure to attract future trainees, with the loss of both the 
cultural heritage and the product within the supply chain.  
OTHER IMPACTS NOT MENTIONED IN THE WORK PROGRAM  
The project will deliver key improvements in the partner’s capabilities:  
  
Partner  Innovation Capabilities  
TWI  Cutting edge research to industry and exploration of the  latest advanced materials, quantum 
technologies and nanotechnology.  
TWI’s deep and unique history allows its experts to balance traditional techniques with modern 
technologies, to find the sweet spot between digital and physical engineering.  
MDU  Innovation and product realization connected to the Division of Product Realization. Research is of 
a cross-disciplinary addressing several areas, including Industry 4.0, Smart Manufacturing, Cyber- 
Physical Systems, Internet of  Things, Artificial Intelligence, Modelling  & Simulation, Predictive  
Maintenance, Digital Twins, and Cyber-Security.  
MITC  Manufacturing, industrialisation, and product development with digitalisation and sustainability as 
cross-sectional areas. Experts in advanced robotics, cyber -physical systems and artificial 
intelligence.  
ARU  Through its Innovative Management Practice Research Centre (IMPact), are part of ‘Grow -In 4.0’, 
contributing to helping smaller firms to stay competitive in the digital future.  
The Business School at Anglia Ruskin University works together with the Facult y of Science and 
Engineering to lead the study on digitisation in manufacturing SMEs, and supporting business 
strategy tool development and SME engagement.  
UMIL  Expertise in organizational behaviour and organizational studies including the nature of 
contemporary workplaces and the ambivalence surrounding job transformation and alternative 
forms of work arrangements.  
Knowledge on future skills requirement and contribution to systematic investigation of working 
practices associated with craftsmanship in contexts characterised by automated manufacture of some 
parts.  
HEK  The optimisation and installation of a new busin ess management system will greatly improve 
productivity as the company grows and optimise the interface of responsibility.  
 
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B         22 of 40  
  
 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
  
LUN  Through the Work Foundation, they back BAE Systems encouraging concerted and co -ordinated 
effort by industry, Government and the education sector to ensure the UK can fully benefit from the 
digital revolution and Industry 4.0.  
Supports the working together of aerospace, engineering and manufacturing sectors and prioritise 
investment in digital and ‘soft skills’, upskilling and retraining and supporting supply chains and 
SMEs, to respond to the expected levels of complexity in industrial and business systems.  
HEK  Industrial  design  and  development  to  prototyping  and  contract  manufacturing  and  supply  of 
products and related services in demand.  
IRIS  Data Management Platforms, Artificial Intelligence -based Decision Support Systems, and Digital 
Platforms.  
ALFA  The project will enable ALFA to understand where adoption of new technologies is of best value to 
the business and it’s skilled workforce  
KNEIA  Will extend its vision to build national and international cooperation networks with the aim to create 
new prospects for business development  
WEB  The introduction of new technologies will enable WEB to expand its project range, adapting burners 
for the future growing marker of hydrogen burners as industry moves towards decarbonising fuel 
sources and processes  
FORD  The project will deliver key improvements in the partner's capabilities in extending the digital thread 
from the engineering phase of a project through to the installation and launch phases, whilst ensuring 
that pre-fabrication verification work is robustl y translated into the physical environment in full 
consideration of both technological and social factors.  
 
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B         23 of 40  
  
SCALE AND SIGNIFICANCE OF THE PROJECT´S CONTRIBUTION TO THE EXPECTED OUTCOMES & 
IMPACTS  
The categorisation defined above applies to individual job roles; a company with many roles may well identify, that different 
roles fall within different categories.  
Within the scope of the Up -Skill project, following on from the categorisation by class leading to defining the 
approach (the How) we will also quantify the impact of adoption of the industry 5.0 approach defined in terms of 
benefits from implementation, including:  
1) Cost savings – reduced costs in primary manufacture.  
2) Quality of output – addressing reproducibility vs. artisan skill as appropriate to define levels of improved 
productivity within specification, considering the human factors which define that specification for a giv en 
application.  
3) Improved productivity – addressing both productivity within current production methods and also the reduced 
development cycle for new products.  
4) Waste reduction – both by enabling higher levels of reproducibility where required and by defining specification 
tolerances with better fit-up between components through software-matching of parts, enabling use of parts which 
would previously have been out of tolerance.  
5) Longevity of demand for skilled labour/craft skills – through enabling better quantification of value-add through 
the development of a reference framework which can be used to express value across the business, to both the 
craftsman and the management levels, enabling training and recruitment decisions to be business driven, 
converting the universal ‘them and us’ perception of workers as a wage problem to one where the value -add to 
the business is understood at all levels.  
  
    Expected Impact  
Industrial use case  Outcome 
category  
Cost 
savings  
Increased 
sales/ 
revenue  
Quality of 
output  
Improved 
productivity  
Waste 
reduction  
Longevity of 
demand  
  
Manufacturing 
and Engineering  
AAA  
  
  
  
  
  
  
AHH  
  
  
  
  
  
  
HAA  
  
  
  
  
  
  
HHA  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Automotive 
industry  
AAA  
  
  
  
  
  n/a  
AHH  
  
  
  
  
  n/a  
HAA  
  
  
  
  
  
  
HHA  n/a  n/a  n/a  n/a  n/a  n/a  
  
  
Process Industry  
AAA  
  
  
  
  
  
  
AHH  
  
  
  
  
  
  
HAA  
  
  
  
  
  
  
HHA  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
AAA  
  
  
  
  
  
  
AHH  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B         24 of 40  
 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
  
Project outputs and expected impacts   
  
Project outputs  Expected impacts  
Cross-fertilisation of latest developments 
in implementation of technology for I4.0 
with best practice in sociological research.  
Recommended strategies for implementation make use of the best 
available data, increasing impact.  
Coverage of applicable range of 
workplace scenarios  
Broadest possible range of beneficiaries  
Detailed understanding of human factors 
within craft skilled roles  
Categorisation framework against which to define skill value and 
consequent approach (substitution vs. augmentation)  
Example case studies  Establishes a gateway for engagement between the consortium and 
industry in delivery of consultancy -based support b eyond the 
project.  
Electronics and 
electrical systems  
HAA  
  
  
  
  
  
  
HHA  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Information 
and  
communications  
AAA  
  n/a  n/a  
  
  n/a  
AHH  
  n/a  n/a  
  
  n/a  
HAA  
  n/a  n/a  
  
  n/a  
HHA  
  n/a  n/a  
  
  n/a  
 
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B         25 of 40  
Best  practice  technology 
 solutions selected  
Most effective solutions implemented  
Enabling  verification  of 
 identified approach  
High  level  of  confidence  in  recommendations  to  industry  and 
government  
Validation of approach  Value-add to case studies  
Case studies demonstrating the impact of 
implementation  
Enables self -assessment by industry across the UK, through 
identification of best fit examples and evaluation of impact of 
adopting particular strategies.  
Enabling validation of identified approach  High  level  of  confidence  in  recommendations  to  industry  and 
government  
 
Future skill needs identified  Informs government, industry and training providers in developing Associated 
with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
training progra ms in advance of future needs, ensuring skills are 
brought on line without delays  
  

 
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B         26 of 40  
REQUIREMENTS AND POTENTIAL BARRIERS   Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
  
Potential Challenges and Obstacles  Odds  Impact  Contingency Measures and Conditions  
Cost barriers: early adopters of industry 
4.0 are alreadymaking significant 
investments in unproven technologies, 
while majority still holds back, waiting 
for standardization.  
High  High  I4.0 has great potential and has so far garnered 
significant traction across board, - €140B annually 
planned investment for the European industry for 
the next 5 years, to support transformation in the 
manufacturing, engineering, automotive, process 
industries, …  
Skilled experts: most manufacturers lack 
skilled personnel that fully understand 
how to leverage industry data 
appropriately, slowing down the full 
implementation of industry 4.0.  
Med  High  We will break down the barriers, learn about the 
technology, while hiring knowledgeable personnel 
and observing each case study (AAA; AHH; HAA 
and HHA) to ensure smooth rollout.  
Resistance from management: there is a 
low level of awareness about I4.0 and its 
benefits including from top management 
which has led to widespread resistance to 
accept the change.  
Med  Med  We will conduct extensive outreach initiatives to 
industry stakeholders to assuage labour co ncerns 
and deliver the message that our technology is 
designed to pair skilled craftsmen and machines.  
Social  barriers  and/or  requirements:  
Solutions too complex to be used 
effectively.  
Med  Med  We will prioritise ease of use to increase the 
adoption rate of the service within our target 
stakeholder groups. The new features will be user-
driven: users selected from demonstration sites and 
throughout their current network will regularly be 
consulted and their feedback used for developing 
product iterations.  
Regulatory barriers and/or requirements: 
unclear legal situation concerning the use 
of external data and unresolved questions 
concerning data security including lack of 
standard and regulations.  
Med  High  Data  privacy  is  a  priority  for  every  customer  
and sometimes they prefer the data s torage on 
premises vs. in the ‘non-EU’ cloud. We will offer 
assurance that the cloud is in a certain EU location 
or from a certain provider, according to client 
preference.  
  
 MEASURES TO MAXIMISE IMPACT   
DISSEMINATION  PLAN  
The consortium fully supports the view that a dissemination and exploitation plan is essential to maximising impact, 
through creating awareness of the project results and achieving the future exploitation of the project. In recognition 
of this importance, two WPs (6 and 7) are dedicated to these actions. This plan will integrate along the project many 
activities to enhance the dissemination and exploitation strategy, maximize the expected impact and boost the 
project's sustainability for its continuation beyond the EU-funding period.  
Dissemination and exploitation will mainly focus on (i) Creating awareness of the project potential through 
dissemination of the results obtained from the WPs; (ii) Performing dissemination of success stories related to the 
innovative developments within the project; (iii) Making the scientific community, stakeholders and decision makers 
aware of the potential uses of the innovative approach to assessment of the value of human capital developed in the 
project; (iv) Convincing end users about the added value of the technology; (v) Collecting feedback from the future 

 
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B         27 of 40  
end users and early adopters to adjust the exploitation plans; (vi) Creating the basis for the exploitation of the results 
that will be obtained.  
In order to structure the whole plan for these actions, the deliverable “Plan for Dissemination and Exploitation of 
Results” (PEDR) will be created Month 6 as part of the WP7. This will integrate in schedule described in the table 
below.  
    
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B         28 of 40  
Scheduling of dissemination plan timing  
  
Within project lifetime  Beyond project lifetime  
  
  
  
  
Dissemination 
needs  
Initial  awareness 
phase   (M1-M12): 
Create  the  project 
visual   
 identity, 
develop  the  main 
dissemination  
tools  and  identify 
some     
 initial 
dissemination 
opportunities  
Targeted awareness 
phase (M13-M24):  
Dissemination 
activities  that  will 
increase awareness  
about     Up-Skill  
technologies  
Full awareness 
phase (M25 -M36): 
Dissemination  
activities   that   will 
keep end users 
informed and 
possibly increase 
the market uptake  
Awareness   after 
project   completion: 
Dissemination 
activities  that   
will promote the  
project for   
 further  
exploitation  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Dissemination 
objectives  
  
• Raise awareness  
• Inform about Up- 
Skill actions to 
stimulate the 
interest of the full 
range of potential 
end users to 
ensure maximum  
exploitation of 
the developed 
foregrounds  
  
  
• Increase and 
maintain awareness  
(including  
objectives & 
expected impact)  
• Keep interested 
potential end users 
informed on the 
latest developments 
of the project  
•Increase 
intensity of 
awareness by 
having more  
promotional  
activities to target 
end users  
•Lobby with policy 
makers and public 
influencers about 
potential of Up -
Skill technology 
and its impact on 
the public and 
environment  
  
  
   
•Commercial 
exploitation  
•Incorporation of  
Up-Skill 
technologies into 
best practices for the 
relevant industry  
  
  
Communication  
on  tools  &  
measures  
  
 Project website, 
project logo, 
posters, leaflets, 
presentations and 
poster templates  
 Update PEDR if 
necessary 
Identify target 
audience  
Keep Project Website 
up to date with new 
developments  
  
• Update PEDR if 
necessary  
• Identify target 
audience  
• Keep Project  
Website up to date  
  
•Ensure project 
website is alive and 
updated even after 
project completion  
• Continuation of 
promotional videos  

 
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B         29 of 40  
  • Use of social 
media (LinkedIn, 
Twitter, etc)  
• Participation and 
organization of 
conferences 
and/or workshops  
• Develop the Plan 
for the  
Exploitation and 
Dissemination of 
project Results 
(PEDR) based on 
Support Services 
for Exploitation 
of  
Research Results  
(SSERR) 
recommendations  
  
• workshops, events, 
and conferences  
• Press releases and 
newsletters  
• Advertisements and 
promotional films on 
social media  
• Cross-dissemination 
with the activities of 
other organizations  
• Open access 
publications 
according to 
requirements (8 
publications)  
• Presentations at 
conferences (at least  
10)  
  
  
  
• With new 
developments, 
workshops, events, 
and conferences  
• Press releases and 
newsletters  
• Advertisements 
and promotional  
films on social 
media  
• Cross-
dissemination with 
the activities of 
other  
• organizations  
• Site tours to 
relevant facilities  
  
  
  
  
  
  
• Materials in social 
media  
• Continue site tours 
to relevant facilities  
with the 
combination 
of workshops  
The scheduling above will be integrated around three main pillars, focusing on awareness, understanding and  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
action. [1] Dissemination for Awareness: to ensure Up -Skill is known to relevant stak eholders, development funds, 
municipalities and public authorities’ planners, and the public. Dissemination for Understanding: to encourage a better 
understanding of the project results leading to wider engagement of external stakeholders with the project,  and a higher 
potential for future uptake of the project outcomes. Dissemination for Action: To ensure adoption of technologies, processes 
and services being developed by the project partners.  
For the dissemination of the results and information on the project activities, the plan will contain the following information, 
including details on the key project results to disseminate:  
• Definition of the target groups (policy makers, industries, R&D s takeholders). Besides th stakeholders, the 
dissemination of results will also reach the general public via the communication actions described below, which 
also include institutional stakeholders.  
• Definition of the message (i.e., enhancing the role of dig italisation and demonstrating the positive impact of the 
project solutions, showing the development of the project, etc.).  
• Selection  of  the  dissemination  channels  (journal  articles  e.g.,  Journal  of  Manufacturing  Systems, 
publications, conferences, exhibitions, website, emails, etc.).  
• Planning of the implementation (timing, costs and human resources needed, etc.)  
• Monitoring and development of Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) to assess the success of the implementation 
(number of publications, number of emails received from stakeholders, number of participations during project 
events, feedback received from audiences at conferences, surveys, etc.)  
The table below outlines a presentation of the different type of user groups related to Up-Skill who will be targeted 
via all the dissemination actions and networking/clustering activities of the project. During the first stages of the 
project, a stakeholders’ analysis will be executed to successfully identify the project end -user community and 
networking actions required.  
Definition of target groups and dissemination objectives  
  
Targets and 
user groups  
  
Description and dissemination 
objectives  
  
Objectives  
Dissemination user 
groups dissemination 
objectives content and 
channels  

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B         30 of 40  
Academic 
communities, 
research 
communities  
This group targets all research 
communities interested in the 
project’s deliverables, research 
developments, results and 
innovation scientific community 
which can be beneficiary for their 
research activities. Innovative 
contributions of the project are 
particularly interesting for 
researchers.  
Transfer of knowledge, raise 
awareness  
Public  deliverables, 
scientific   
publications,  
conferences  and other  
scientific events.  
Industrial 
sector  
An important objective of Up -Skill is 
to address and trigger the active 
involvement of the industrial sector. 
TWI is a membership organisation 
with 600+ industrial members 
(aerospace, oil & gas marine, heavy 
industry, automotive, electronics, …) 
across 40 countries who benefit from 
TWI 70 years of knowledge and 
expertise in re search, contract R&D, 
technical, standards information and 
engineering services. TWI actively 
participates in 100+ national and 
international standards committees.  
Demonstrate the business  
potential of inclusivity 
towards early adoption of 
products and s ervices 
developed by the 
consortium, collect 
feedback on their 
expectations and 
requirement to adjust 
commercial exploitation 
plans, convince about the 
technical feasibility and 
competitiveness of the 
concept and tools 
developed.  
• Market test results, 
techno- Economic 
assessment, etc. • 
Dedicated 
workshops, Public 
deliverables, 
Scientific 
publications, related 
project Events.  
  
  
Government 
bodies and 
policy makers  
This is a wide group encompassing 
innovation driven local and regional 
authorities, representatives and 
associations, Ministries, parliaments 
and Public Administrations at national 
and international level.  
Demonstrate the benefits of 
Up-Skill concept and tools 
to reach the inclusive 
European future goals, raise 
awareness about proposed 
regulatory evolution.  
Final  
recommendation in 
deliverables, press  
kit, general 
dissemination, 
participation in policy 
events  
European and 
international 
technology 
Networks  
This group refers to activities 
addressing external task forces.  
Use as dissemination  
relays towards their 
members  
Public deliverables, 
press kit, articles, 
press releases, 
communication  
Package  
EU projects 
working in 
similar  
domain  
The participation of project partners in 
other relevant projects offers the 
opportunity to establish quick links 
among parties through joint actions. A 
list of these has already been  
established, as presented in Section  
1.2,  with  a  more  detailed  
explanation  on  why  to  reach  to 
them.  
Coordinate  dissemination 
activities in order to 
maximize their impact,  
exchange  R&D  results  to 
improve robustness of 
project results.  
Dissemination 
events, presentation 
at conferences (TWI  
Digital  
Manufacturing), 
participation in 
workshops from 
other projects.  
 
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B         31 of 40  
The 
 gener
al public  
The general public consists of a 
general audience  and other actors not 
identified as direct targeted groups by 
the project, though this group can have 
strong interest in the project.  
Raise awareness on the 
importance of inclusive 
future work and decent life 
for EU citizens specifically 
as a credible alternative for 
the future, to inform about 
the benefits of the project 
towards a sustaina ble 
production system.  
Project website, 
brochure, press 
releases, social media, 
project events  
At the end of the project, we plan to elaborate the dissemination impact analysis where we will evaluate the responses 
gained from the different target groups. This will bring important information for further exploitation of the project 
results by particular consortium partners after the end of the project. In addition to the external action, within the 
project there will also be the creation of an External Advisory Board (EAB) to achieve broader industrial 
engagement. This board will provide valuable feed back on the project, introduce challenging requirements to be 
considered and have a major impact on the project’s sustainable development. The EAB members will also 
participate in the dissemination actions.  
Quantifieddissemination monitoring (KPIs)  
(a) The p artners will participate in at least 10 conferences where the project results will be presented either via 
oral/poster presentations and where this could lead to the publication of conference proceedings. Darren is highly 
involved in TWI Digital Manufacturing Conference, an innovation network that works to nature and coordinate 
partnerships that enable engineering advances in specialist areas in response to commercial needs. In addition, TWI 
is actively involved in NSIRC Annual Conference – a showcase of in dustry relevant PhD research projects, 
including additive manufacturing, robotics and sensors, attended by experts from industry interested to utilise the 
research in their R&D programmes.  
(b) The partner will make 10 publications in conference proceeeding   
(c) The partners will publish at least 8 scientific publications in peer -reviewed journals, for example the  Journal of 
Manufacturing Systems and the Journal of Manufacturing Technology Management.  
(d) The partner will make publication through websites, social web-based media, promotional videos  
(e) The partner will participate in at least 3 industry conferences  
(f) The partner will participate in at least 4 academic conferences (minimum two per year in the last two  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B         32 of 40  
years)   
(g) The partner will organize at least 2 international technology workshop and 1 final information day   
(h) The partner will deliver webinars through regional and national “Industry 4.0” promoting bodies. Minimum 
of 9 (3 each in Italy, UK and Sweden)  
(i) The partner will involve at least 150 interested stakeholders in the project in each of the participating 
countries (450 firms made aware of the project’s work) through direct contact, webinars, and other 
presentations.   
(j) The partner will participate in 6 national trade fairs (2 in Italy, UK, Sweden)  
(k) The partner will report on cost analysis and positioning of technology   
(l) TWI will participate as exhibitor in at least 3 industry conferences to promote the project results  
(m) In addition, the consortium will or ganize one technology workshop related to the project results with a 
target of 40 interested stakeholders.  
     
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B         33 of 40  
EXPLOITATION PLAN  
Creating markets from research results is becoming a requirement to boost research, towards a constant evolution in 
which universities and research centres are engaging with companies and the non -academic and/or private sector. 
By its nature, Up-Skill holds the potential for exploiting research results at various levels, involving different types 
of organizations, such as industries, research centres as well as other public interest organizations, for the benefit of 
the affected stakeholders. The plan for exploitation, which features activities in  WP5&6, will consider these different 
levels and will present the different aspects below:  
• Target groups identification: lead and affected stakeholders principally. The range of organization types 
targeted by Up-Skill is wide enough to ensure an efficient outreach, while, at the same time, protecting project 
results vis a vis external developer and preserving the interest of all partners.  
• Lists of outputs to be exploited (Table 9) and explanation on how to proceed with their development.  
• Definition of the exploitation and valorisation strategy (improvement of dissemination strategies, market and 
needs analysis, feasibility studies, research of funding, standardization, commercialization and transfer of 
knowledge, ...). This strategy will outline potential trends, technology scenario, partners and competitors in 
the areas of interest for the project This will also include the implementation of performance indicators to 
assess the adequate valorisation strategy.  
• Methods of exploitation (patents, company creation, private public partnerships, …). The conclusion of a fair 
and generally agreed Consortium Agreement before the start of the project represents an important first step 
towards a sound exploitation of the project results. Then, the range of different possibilities for exploitation 
should be studied and analysed towards the TRL of the technologies provided, in order to develop the 
appropriate plan, which takes also into account the nature of the partner(s) involved in the dissemination and 
exploitation and of their financial conditions.  
This exploitation plan will be an evolving document with its initial form presented here, and it will be updated 
periodically during the course of the project. Concrete measures for exploitation have already been identified by the 
consortium according to the exploitable results of the project and will be further gathered in the final exploitation 
plan to be delivered Month 6. The major project outputs already identified and that will have the most value fo r 
exploitation:  
List of exploitable outputs  
Types of results  Owner  Exploitation route 
and protection  Potential users  Dissemination to ensure 
exploitation  
Creation of 
scientific data  
All  Open databases  Basic and applied 
researchers, Engineers, 
Developers  
Dissemination in open access,  
Lectures and courses,  
Publications through websites 
and Journals.  
Reports & 
Deliverables  
All  Through the 
publication of 
scientific papers  
Basic/applied Researchers  Participation in scientific 
conferences, participation in 
trade Fairs  
Report on cost 
analysis and 
positioning of 
the technology  
All  Participation and 
support to EU 
policies  
EU  and  national  Policy 
makers  
Dissemination to policy makers 
through EU networks and EU 
associations  
   
   
  
    
Actions planned to achieve the exploitation of the results and the impact of the project  

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B         34 of 40  
   
Types of action  Description  Targeted groups  
During the project  
Events  Organization   of   1   international   technology   workshop 
addressing the main technology application of the project.  
R&D sector, the academic  
and non -academic 
organizations with specific 
players in the field, the 
public at large, EU projects  
    interest.  
Events  Organization of 1 final info day: The impact and further 
exploitation of the project results will be introduced to a 
wider public.  
Public at large, policy 
makers, media, and all other 
stakeholders  
Internal event  Exploitation and IPR workshop  Consortium  
Internal event  Participation to IPR webinars organized by the IPR EC help 
desk.  
Consortium (at least one 
webinar during the course of 
the project).  
Recruitment  of 
early-stage 
researchers.  
Recruitment of at least 4 PhD students and 6 pos -doctoral 
positions who should moreover be especially  relevant 
candidates for the creation of innovative start-ups.  
The PhD students and post - 
docs themselves  
Special emphasis will be put 
on  training  them  for 
innovation creation.  
IP Protection  The creation of patents is planned to guarantee the good 
protection of the project results to ensure a good exploitation 
management.  
Direct stakeholders for end- 
use.  
Market  test  
assessment  
The realization of a market test with the outreach to more 
than 80 stakeholders will boost further engagement into the 
project.  
End users of the technology, 
policy makers.  
Work  package  
tasks  
The implementation of a WP dedicated to the scale up of the 
project solutions. The objective of this task is to provide 
useful information to Public Policies at larger scale about the 
interest and chance of success to scale up the project 
solutions, where it’s the most judicious to introduce it for the 
larger expansion.  
Policy makers and industries  
Collaboration  
with  other  
projects  
Results might be useful for fundamental information, system 
evaluations, innovative inputs, network publication.  
Stakeholders from national, 
EU and international funded 
projects.  
Creation  of 
external advisory 
board  
To ensure management of innovation within the consortium 
and guarantee that all measures are taken to maximise 
dissemination and potential exploitation of the results during 
the project. The board will include key actors in target areas 
and will be used as a tool to advise on related issues such as 
public acceptance, local regulations, fair inventive schemes 
and exploitation of project results.  
Consortium actors in the 
development  of  key 
exploitable results.  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B         35 of 40  
Dissemination 
and 
communication  
  
  
A strong dissemination and communication strategy is 
planned to ensure that strategic feedback on the technology 
is received and that dialogue between the consortium and 
stakeholders is reinforced to bring coherence and strategy to 
future development of the technology.  
All audience.  
  
  
  
  
After the project  
 
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B         36 of 40  
Research 
development  
Future internal research at the partners’ institutions will be 
carried out to ensure the further competitiveness of the 
technology development/upgrade. The results will be used as 
a background for future collaborative innovation projects. 
This should take place potentially through new EU funding 
or national funding.  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 
24/06/2022Consortium  partners  and  
new key actors in the field, 
especially targeting the 
industry actors  
Creation of new 
services and  
products  
The new services and products likely to be exploited by the 
SMEs of the consortium to propose new services or with the 
creation of spin-off and start-up companies.  
SMEs, external 
 industry actors  
Further funding  Horizon Europe funding for in novation (especially the 
SMES instrument), public procurement, venture capitals, 
private investors, banks, business angels will be sought for, 
to ensure the further development of the technology.  
End  users  of  the   project, 
investors  
Roadmap  to  
commercialisation  
A wide dissemination of the roadmap will ensure that 
stakeholders engage with the project results even after the 
end of the project.  
Industrial and policy makers  
Open databases  The permanent access to the main results of the project in 
different databases.  
All interested stakeholders  
  
The development of the complete and consolidated business plan will be executed in the framework of WP6 and will 
take place in three distinct steps as identified below:  
1) Feasibility Study: This will be the first step towards the definition of the business plan with the aim of 
finding out the workability and cost effectiveness of the business cases targeting the EU set-plan objectives. 
This will include calculations, examination and projected estimations of the business opportunity to identify 
the actual potentials towards adoption and commercialization of the technology. The project is developing 
understanding that will be commercialized through consultancy and indirectly through enhancement to 
future technology projects by enabling more effective uptake through due consideration of implementation 
approaches. The feasib ility study will be based on technical, commercial, financial and organizational 
aspects including the description of the Up -Skill outcomes to be commercialized, the identification and 
analysis of the different sector markets and domains, financial assumpt ions regarding implementation, 
funding requirements, as well as personnel and organizational requirements. Following the success of this 
step, which proves the actual potential for the commercialization, the consortium will proceed to the next 
step towards the definition of the business modelling and the business plan development.  
2) Business Modelling: This will be based on the utilisation of a business model canvas approach as a visual 
chart which defines the value proposition, infrastructure, distribution channels, key resources and activities 
and impact of the business outcome to develop the business models towards the exploitation of the Up -
Skill solutions. The business modelling will also ensure the proper positioning of the solutions and use 
through the elaboration of an effective business cycle involving all project partners and stakeholders.  
3) Business Plan: Following the above two steps, a complete business plan will be developed that defines the 
way that the project outcomes will be brought to market including steps towards and after the project end. 
It will also include identification of funding opportunities for continuing the project activities including 
private funds, funding through other national and/or regional R&I programmes, ... The focus of the business 
plan will be to maximize the impact of the project outcomes that follow:  
(a) Propose means to facilitate an increase of the market-readiness  
(b) Identify mechanisms to lower the entry barriers of the developed outputs into the EU and  other markets.  
(c) Positioning the Up -Skill solutions as a means of contributing to the growth of competitive inclusive 
digitalisation in Europe.  

Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B         37 of 40  
  
COMMUNICATION ACTIVITIES   
The communication activities that will be part of the dissemination plan will be tailored in order to ensure  that 
important messages are widespread to the adequate targeted audience and that the public at large gets connected with 
Up-Skill. Such activities complement the dissemination as they “translate” the sometimes- complex results into easy-
to-understand media resources focusing more on the impacts and added value for the endusers and society. The 
project will have an open access approach in se veral ways. The exploitation plan describes that the project will 
establish "all open databases" and execute an "open access dissemination".  
     

Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B         38 of 40  
The main purposes of the communication activities of the project have been defined as follow:   
• To show how European collaboration has achieved more than would have otherwise been possible, notably 
in achieving scientific excellence, contributing to competitiveness and solving societal challenges;  
• To show how the outcomes are relevant to people’s everyday lives , by creating jobs, introducing novel 
technologies, or making people’s lives more comfortable in other ways.  
• To make better use of the results, by making sure they are taken up by decision-makers to influence policy-
making and by industry and the scientif ic community to ensure a follow -up of the development of the 
technology.  
• During the first stages of the project a stakeholder analysis will be executed.  
• The members of the external advisory board (EAB) will participate in the dissemination actions.   
• A dissemination impact analysis will be executed and elaborated in the end of the project based on the 
responses gained from the target groups.  
• To show how European collaboration has achieved scientific excellence, contributing to competitiveness 
and solving societal challenges.  
• To show how the outcomes are relevant to people’s everyday lives, by creating jobs and introducing novel 
technologies.  
• To make sure that the project results are adopted by decision -makers to influence policy -making and by 
industry and the scientific community to ensure a follow-up of the development of the technology.  
  
The communication strategy will be led by KNEIA and conducted around seven main elements, discussed below. 
These combine a set of mass media communication (Press releases, website, brochures) and interpersonal 
communication (workshops, open days, conferences, etc) in order to reach the public at large as maximum as 
possible. These activities should be considered as non -exhaustive and will be updated as the project evolves. For 
each communication activity, a synthetic action plan will be inserted in the D&E plan to detail the methods planned 
to guarantee the success of the action (target groups, message to be conveyed, review procedures, impact monitoring, 
etc).  
  
Visual Identity  The project branding will help all partners communicate about the project in a uniform, 
consistent, and professional manner. The project branding will include project logo, visual 
identity, templates for word and PowerPoint, written identity including tagline and key 
messages  
Communication 
materials  
A communication package containing the main elements of the project and gathered in a 
PowerPoint presentation, a poster and a Word document (one page project description, 
objectives, impacts)  
1 flyer, 1 brochure, 8 newsletters (1 every 6 months), 2 press releases and 2 articles in 
specialized magazines, 1 timeline infographic, 1 motion design video to be promoted 
through the  EU audio-visual channels and YouTube plus another one on the filming of the 
pilot plant in action  
Liaise with the different partners communication departments for wider dissemination of 
these materials using the partners existing communication channels  
Website  The public website will  contain information targeted for the general public (description of 
the project, the WPs, the  partners, basic information on the technology). There will also be 
specific information targeted  towards the different type of stakeholders linked to the 
project (training materials, scientific  papers, environmental impact, …).  
Social 
networks and 
online presence  
Social web-based media (creation of 1 LinkedIn page and 1 Twitter project accounts, and which 
will service to target the general audience as well as more technology related stakeholders.  
  

Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B         39 of 40  
  
   
KPIs for communication in the UpSkill application:  
(a) Presentation material: a PowerPoint, a poster and a Word document.  
(b) 2 press releases per year in years 2 and 3 (4 total)  
(c) 2 articles in specialized magazines per year in years 2 and 3 (4 in total)  
(d) 8 newsletters, (I every 6 months)  
(e) 3 flyers outlining different aspects of the project (technology developments, future of work, Industrious 
Modernity)  
(f) 1 brochure (updated each year – 3 versions in total translated into English, Swedish and Italian) (g) 1 timeline 
infographic,   
(h) 2 motion design videos to promote the project and present the pilot plant in action.  
(i) Interviews of each of the partners will be done and integrated into a video for online distribution  
(j) A website will contain information targeted for the general public and support tools developed by the project.  
(k) 1 LinkedIn page and participation to the H2020 CSP projects twitter account.  
In addition, there are also suggestions for activities beyond the project:  
(a) Roadmap to commercialization: A wide dissemination of the roadmap will ensure that stakeholders engage 
with the project results even after the end of the project.  
(b) Open databases, the permanent access to the main results of the project in different databases. All interested 
stakeholders  
(c) The results will be used for future collaborative innovation projects to ensure the further competitiveness of 
the technology development.  
(d) The new services and products likely to be exploited by the SMEs of the consortium to propose new services 
or with the creation of spin-off and start-up companies.  
  
MANAGEMENT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY  
(a) Intellectual property rights   
For the success of the Up -Skill project, it is essential that all project partners agree on explicit rules concerning IP 
ownership, access rights to any Background and Foreground IP for the execution of the project and the protection of 
intellectual property rights (IPRs) and confidential information before the project starts. Therefore, such issues will 
be addressed in detail within the Consortium Agreement between all project partners. The main purpose of the 
Consortium Agreement is to establish a legal f ramework for the project in order to minimize any internal issues 
within the UP-SKILL consortium related to the work, IP–Ownership, Access Rights to Background and Foreground 
IP for the duration of the project and any other matters of the consortium’s interest.  
  

Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B         40 of 40  
(b) Access Rights to Background and Foreground IP during the project   
In order to ensure a smooth execution of the project, the project partners agree to grant royalty –free access to 
background and foreground IP for the execution of the project. Ther efore, all project partners determine any 
background IP they are willing to submit to the project within the Consortium Agreement before the project starts. 
Any details concerning the access rights to background and foreground IP for the duration of the pr oject will be 
defined  
in the Consortium Agreement.  
 
  
(c) IP Ownership   
Results shall be owned by the project partner carrying out the work leading to such results. If any result is created 
jointly by at least two project partners and it is not possible to  distinguish between the contributions of each of the 
project partners, such work will be jointly owned by the contributing project partners. The same shall apply if, in 
the course of carrying out work on the project, an invention is made having two or mor e contributing parties 
contributing to it, and it is not possible to separate the individual contributions. Such joint inventions and all related 
patent applications and patents shall be jointly owned by the contributing parties. Details concerning jointly owned 
results, joint inventions and joint patent applications will be addressed in the Consortium Agreement.  
  
(d) Consortium Agreement   
The purpose of the Consortium Agreement is to establish a legal framework for the project in order to minimize any 
internal issues within the UP -SKILL consortium related to the work, IP Ownership, Confidential Information, 
Access Rights to Background and F oreground IP for the duration of the project and any other matters of the 
consortium’s interest.  
 SUMMARY  
KEY ELEMENTS OF THE IMPACT SECTION  
  
SPECIFIC NEEDS    
  
EXPECTED RESULTS    
  
D & E & C MEASURES  
Manufacturers 
seek  solutions 
that will guide 
the integration 
 of 
craftsmen 
 and 
machines to fully 
extract  benefits 
that  can 
 be reaped 
from it. In the 
near future, every 
data consumer 
company will be 
demanded to 
have experts 
dedicated to take 
decisions based 
i. Advancing the knowledge on 
future skills requirement and 
contributing to the systematic 
investigation of working practices 
associated with craftsmanship in 
contexts characterised by 
automated manufacture of some 
parts.  
ii. Assessing how Italian policies 
influence employment, skills 
acquisition and retention, and 
industrial competitiveness  
iii. Offering empirical knowledge on 
Industrial design sector and 
advancing the understanding of the 
current state of skills needs and  
training within the sector in Italy  
iv. Two P ost-doctoral Researchers 
based in Milan to carry out 
fieldwork, review the literature 
Communication with citizens - will 
comprise a range of activities, including 
publications; presentations; the use of social 
media networks and on -line platform 
websites; audio -visual media (e.g., 
podcasts),  
Dissemination - To maximise the impact of 
the research, actions will be directed to: 1. 
The academic community; 2. Non -
Scientific audience: (a) policy - makers 
involved in designing employment policies 
to foster industrial competitiveness (b) 
National and EU organisations: to create 
awareness of the impo rtance of the topic 
among organizations interested in 
promoting employment and training options  
at  both the local and EU level; 3. Wider 
industry: craft businesses, manufacturing 
businesses reliant on skilled workers and 

Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B         41 of 40  
on validated 
information.  
and analyse cases, will be 
recruited.  
organizations promoting craft and  manual 
skills at national and local levels.  
  
    
 
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B         42 of 40  
 
TARGET 
GROUPS  
  
Manufacturing  
Industry  
  
Artisans  
 
 
OUTCOMES  
• Pathway for combining I5.0 
and craft skill, either as a 
designated role or as a highly 
skilled role embedded within 
manufacturing  
  
• Validated  recommendations  
 
 
IMPACTSAssociated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 
24/06/2022  
Scientific:  
  Establishing  a  new 
 methodology  for reviewing, 
interpreting and describing the emerging  field 
 of  human/technology interfaces 
created by I4.0 Economic:  
• Enabling ongoing manufacturing of products 
where skills are at risk, estimated to retain 
15,000 direct jobs and underpin 200,000 jobs 
across the EU  
• Improving the utilisation, efficiency of 
highly skilled workers, estimated to increase 
productivity by 5% on average 
  Preserving 
innovation capabilities Societal:  
• Establishing training programmes to mee t 
identified future needs  
• Enhancing and growing opportunities for 
decent work Cultural:  
• Preserves traditions and cultural heritage  
• Increased ease of repair and retention of 
cultural heritage  
 
 
Cultural  
Preservation  
 for I5.0 and craft skill 
integration roadmap  
  
• Establishing the link between 
skills and value in 
manufacturing environments  
  
• Assessment  of 
 routes  to  
access benefits of I4.0  
 
  
    
3.  QUALITY AND EFFICIENCY OF THE IMPLEMENTATION  Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 
24/06/2022 
 WORK PLAN AND RESOURCES   
OVERALL STRUCTURE OF THE WORK PLAN  
The project is organised in seven main work packages as shown in the WP breakdown (Figure 7).  

 
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B         43 of 40  
WP1 - Enabling Technology Assessment  
To carry out a systematic gap analysis for interoperable solutions through the expert review of emerging enabling 
technologies for I5.0 with particular focus on the interfaces between them. Capturing a wide portfolio of studies 
and tools will build system capability for use in WP2 and the web based Up-Skill platform, which is the public 
dissemination and system tool approach.  
WP2 - Data collection (use cases)  
Development of case study requirements within manufacturing/production businesses, reviewing skilled roles, 
customs, habits and cultural difference in their approach and identifying SWOT for I5.0 within them. The 
generated data (per each case) feeds in to WP3 and the Up-Skill platform. The Malardalen region, Sweden and 
Milan region, Italy will be studied as regional ecosystems.  
WP3 - Use Case Development: Skills vs Quantified Products  
 
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B         44 of 40  
  
  
Figure 7: Up-Skill Pert Chart – Overall Structure  
  
This WP extracts the training needs from each use-case, in conjunction with the results acquired from theAssociated with 
document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022  
previous WPs, enabling a comprehens ive set and widely accepted user requirements that translate to the Up - 
Skill platform (WP5) for use by industry. The case studies also benefit from tailored training and programming 
to meet their particular manufacturing conditions, for use and with perti nence to broader industry through the 
Up- Skill platform.  
WP5 – Up-Skill Platform  
This WP draws all of the data and findings from WP1, 2, 3, and 4 together, and packages them into our intelligent 
Up-Skill platform where all stakeholders can engage in industry 5.0 adoption from SMEs to large enterprises, to 
policy-makers and individuals. Up-Skill will host all of the case study findings, training programmes and future 
skills mapping across all industries.  
WP6 - Exploitation, Dissemination & Communication  
Development of case studies within supply chain settings, reviewing ‘hand built’ product with respect to 
opportunities for data -driven improvements in yield/ultimate  performance. Matching equipment and 
ethnography, requirements with WP4 to augment Up -Skilling ‘hand built’ processes, boosting quality, output 
and job protection, the methods and results being captured in the Up-Skill platform.  
WP4 - Training needs assessment  

 
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B         45 of 40  
The goal of WP6 is the dissemination of the project to a wide audience, conveying the Up -Skill concept, 
development case studies and their findings to key actors, and integrating their feedback. Additionally, 
exploitation plans for key project results will be derived including video outputs and the web-based platform to 
extoll best practice and likely development pathways to achieve holistic company/staff benefit. Therefore Up - 
Skill’s business delivery methodologies will be presented as a learning-based approach.  
WP7 - Project Management  
Project management will ensure the achievement of the project objectives within time and budget constraints, by 
planning, organizing and controlling the integrated effort of the consortium. This will be a continuous task 
throughout the project. Consortium partners belong to different fields, organizations, enterprises and effective 
information flow/communication is necessary due to heterogeneous disciplines. Management will be realised 
by: a) Build -up/support knowledge, and experience exchange, b) Meetings with all project partners and if 
necessary, visits of the coordinator to partner sites, c) Resolving problems if they appear. Detailed explanations 
on the management structure, decision -making, communication methods and instruments, quality assurance, 
instruments for monitoring and reporting progress and management of knowledge and intellectual property are 
given in the section “Management Structure and Procedures”.  
  
 
 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
UP-SKILL GANTT CHART  
  
WORK PACKAGES           GANTT  
  
TASK DESCRIPTIONS  
  
LEAD  
1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  
WP1. ENABLING TECHNOLOGY ASSESSMENT                                                                            
T1.1 (Design) Review of ethnographic approaches, and method planning with use 
case development  
  
ARU  
                                                                        
T1.2 Ethnography workshop review  ARU                                                                          
T1.3 Literatuire review / technology gap identification  TWI                                                                          
WP2. DATA COLLECTION (USE CASES)  ARU                                                                          
T2.1 Case study assesments  ARU                                                                          
T2.2. Ethnography research period  ARU                                                                      
T2.3 Detailed case study write up for Up-Skill platform  ARU                                                                          
WP3. USE CASE DEVELOPMENT: Skills vs Quantified Products  LUN                                                                          
T3.1 Identification of enabling technologies  LUN  
                                                                       
T3.2 Manufacturing workflows  LUN  
                                                                       
T3.3 Hardware identification and instillation  TWI                                                                          
T3.4 Trial Manufacture (with ethnography)  TWI                                                                          
T3.5 Trial feedback back case study  LUN                                                                          
WP4. TRAINING NEEDS ASSESSMENT  MITC                                                                          
T4.1 Digital outcomes and training requirements  LUN                                                                          
T4.2 Programme training and usage methods  MITC                                                                          
T4.3 Hardware training  TWI                                                                          
T4.4 Evaluation of systems effectiveness  MITC                                                                          

 
 
T4.5 Future skills mapping  UMIL                                                                          
WP5. UP-SKILL PLATFORM  IRIS                                                                          
T5.1 Design and requirements definition for data capture and representation  IRIS                                                                          
T5.2 Data repository development, data capture processes and pi pelines, data 
population and formatting  
IRIS                                      
  
                                    
T5.3 Decision Support System (DSS) development using advanced data processing 
algorithms (AI techniques)  IRIS                                                                        
T5.4 Validation testing on-line/in-situ with KPIs and integration with use cases  IRIS                                                                          
WP6. EXPLOITATION, DISSEMINATION & COMMUNICATION  KNEIA                                                                          
T6.1 Communication Activities  KNEIA                                                                          
T6.2 Dissemination Activities  KNEIA                                                                          
T6.3 Exploitation of results, IPR and Business model  KNEIA                                                                        
T6.4 Clustering and Networking activities  KNEIA                                                                          
T6.5 Stakeholder analysis and engagement  KNEIA                                                                          
WP7. PROJECT MANAGEMENT  TWI                                                                          
T7.1 Technical Management  TWI                                                                          
T7.2 Financial Management  MDU                                                                          
T7.3 Project Reporting  MDU                                      
  
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B               38 of 40  
 
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B         48 of 40  
DETAILED WORK DESCRIPTION   Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
  
Table 3.1h: Purchase costs items (travel and subsistence, equipment and other goods, works and services)  
  
  
   
   
   
   
Total   
    
 
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B         49 of 40  
  
7/KNEIA    
  Cost (€)  Justification  
Other goods, works and 
services  
  
Remaining purchase costs 
(<15% of pers. Costs)  
  
Total  47,500  
    
8/WEB    
  Cost (€)  Justification  
 
  
  
 CAPACITY OF PARTICIPANTS AND CONSORTIUM AS A WHOLE  
Mälardalen University (MDU) is a 
progressive and collaborative university and 
one of Sweden’s largest institutes of higher 
education.  
The University is characterised  by its close partnerships with 
international companies in the public sector such as ABB, Volvo 
and Bombardier and HEIs all around the world. Our high 
investment in research generates beneficial solutions for societal 
development.  
MDU will work closely with SSH partners 
ARU an UMIL in WP2 and will lead the 
research effort in the Malardalen re gion of 
Sweden, where the case studies of HEK, and 
Alfa Laval are situated.  

 
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B         50 of 40  
Mälardalen Industrial Technology Center 
AB (MITC) seeks to develop industry, 
academia and society by transfering academic  
knowledge    into    activities    of    
industrial  
companies. MITC work directly with the manufacturing industry, 
having member companies such as Volvo CE, Volvo GTO, GKN, 
Alfa Laval and Hexagon. MITC has worked with over 150 SMEs 
with the area of focus being manufacturing, industrialisation, and 
product d evelopment with digitalisation and sustainability as 
cross-sectional areas. Lately particular focus is being put on 
advanced robotics, cyber -physical systems and artificial 
intelligence. MITC has years of experience running coaching and 
development program mes with SMEs. Several effective 
programmes have been developed in areas such as digitalisation, 
Lean and continuous improvement and production development.  
  
Mälardalen Industrial Technology Center will 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
lead WP4 - Training needs assessment. MITC 
will build on their existing portfolio of 
training courses in and around the area of 
digitisation and sustainability, specifically 
aimed at SMEs. MITC w ill also provide 
additional case studies, which have been 
preliminarily confimed by GKN and Volvo 
GTO if any gaps are identified following 
undertaking the case studies at consortium 
partners.  
  
  
    
   

 
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B         51 of 40  
The University of Milan (UMIL) is a 
leading institute in Italy and Europe 
for scientific productivity, being the 
largest university in the region and 
also  
an important resource for the socio -economic context of which 
the university is a part. With experienced researchers in the fields 
of organizational behaviour and organizational studies, there 
research focus is on the nature of contemporary workplaces and 
the ambivalence surrounding job transformation and alternative 
forms of work arrangements. UMIL have extensively researched 
the changing relationship between new organizational models 
and the quality, nature and meaning of work.  
UMIL will lead the research effort in the Milan 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
region of Italy focussing on a range of Italian 
companies that are involved in the production 
of aesthetics and art goods, and that are 
characterised by a certain level of skilled craft 
in the production process. The focus is on 
small and medium scale companies involved 
in styling, designing and prototyping 
industrial design products in a diverse range 
of sectors including furniture and furnishings, 
interior design and yacht design, such as 
companies like Cassina, Edra, Anonimia 
Castelli, Benetti.  
Helekopter  AB  is  a  company   creating, 
developing and building company 
structure  
around SME -companies. Aiming to minimize administrative 
work, risk, and time to market. Sharing organizational resources 
and innovative best practice over different marke t segments and 
branches. Engage in how future education system can be adjusted 
to fit SME-companies need of students with broad understanding 
cross companies disciplines.  
To assess, capture and verify the interface 
change between a SME -companies 
administrative work and business driven 
work, driven by customer new behavior and 
digitalization. Implementing the learning and 
create the changes for SME -companies 
continues growth with next generation 
employees  
IRIS is a Deep -Tech Engineering 
company specialised in Real Time 
Monitoring and Industrial Artificial 
Intelligence Solutions for  
driving improved process quality and efficiency for industry. 
Our  challenging and complex international projects provide our 
teams with the ideal environment for furthering their knowledge 
and upgrading their skills. Deploying AI and machine learning 
to connect upstream and downstream processes across the entire 
value chain. IRIS’ work has resulted in 15 patents granted since 
its formation in 2007   
IRIS will act as designer and developer of the 
digital tools as well as provider of AI 
algorithms associated with the DSS  
developed   and   deployed   in   WP5.   The  
expectation is to fulfil the objectives of the 
WP successfully and contribute to achieving 
the global objectives in the project, Also, the 
development of a robust and commercial DSS 
and digital platform ready to be protected by 
IPR rights (patents, publications, ownership, 
etc...).