3.2 Associated Partners  
Partner Name and Capacity  Role in the Project  
TWI is one of Europe’s largest independent, , 
membership-based research and technology 
organisations. TWI has a multidisciplinary  
team      of      consultants,  
engineers and technicians dedicated to the development and 
application of advanced inspection  techniques, structural 
integrity assessment and risk management. TWI is internationally 
renowned for its collaborative research, technology projects and 
teams who can add value to almost every industry sector – from 
automotive, offshore oil and gas, civil  engineering and nuclear 
power, to electronics, advanced aircraft (both civilian and 
military), medical equipment and solar power.  
To assess, capture and implement the 
hardware requirements for the case studies. 
By agreement and liaison between the 
ethnography and the programming and by 
undertaking suitable training both for and on 
behalf of the case studies, partners and 
reporting the findings thereof.  
Anglia Ruskin University (ARU) is one of the 
top 350 universities in the world and one of the 
top 40  universities  in  the  UK.  It  is  one  of  
the institutions  predicted  to  be  challenging  
the  
global elite by 2030. The Faculty of Business and Law at ARU is 
a full-service business school and host to four research centres. 
One of these, the IMPact research centre led by Professor Chris 
Ivory, is already home to ERDF, Interreg and FORTE-funded (a 
national Swedish Funding body) projects on issue rangin g from 
digitalization and Industry 4.0 to the green economy.  
ARU will coordinate the ethnographic 
research effort over the life of the project 
(leading and organising research training, co- 
ordination meetings, knowledge exchange 
workshops and site visits ). ARU will also 
lead on the writing of related cross-case study 
reports, the literature review, interim reports 
and final report.  
ALFA LAVAL (ALFA) is a leading 
global provider of first-rate products in 
the areas of heat transfer, separation and  
fluid handling. With these as its base, Alfa Laval aims to help 
enhance the productivity and competitiveness of its customers in 
various in dustries throughout the world. We define their 
challenges and deliver sustainable products and solutions that 
meet their requirements – mainly in energy, the environment, 
food and the marine industry  
ALFA will make up one of the case studies Associated 
with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
investigated. ALFA undertakes a variety of 
engineering quite different activities (different 
markets, different volumes) falls under a number 
of categories. However, they are keen to advance 
their level of industry 4.0 capability and automate 
where they can.  
KNEIA deploy a multidisciplinary 
approach in order to satisfy clients and 
partners in  
the fields of exploitation and dissemination consulting, 
innovation based scale up, training, plus technical direction and 
assistance. Our vision is to build national and international 
cooperation networks with the aim to create new prospects for 
business development in Spain and other EU countries. The 
group al ready have an existing relationship with IRIS through 
their partnership in the Horizon 2020 ‘PRESERVE’ project.  
KNEIA  will  lead  the  exploitation,  
dissemination and communication activities  
 Webber  Brennertechnik  GmbH  
(WEB)   has   been   developing   
and  
supplying  gas  burners  for  industry,  commercial  devices  and 
household appliances for 35 years .  
WEB are a case study in Up -Skill looking at 
emerging technologies to solve a production 
problem. WEB can’t offer s pecific burners to 
customers due to the only two specialist 
employees who were able to manufacture them 
unable to due to health reasons.  

 
 
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B         42 of 40  
Lancaster University is among the best in 
the UK., ranked amongst the country’s 
top 20 universities. Lancaster has a 
world-class reputation for research and  
teaching excellence, with many of their academic leaders within 
their fields of study and their subjects consistently highly ranked 
in major league tables.  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 
24/06/2022Supporting ethnographic study with 
researchers based at end user organisations. Also 
Lancaster University will develop and apply artificial 
intelligence and machine learning across the use cases  
Ford Motor 
Company (FORD) 
 is  a  global 
company that designs, 
manufactures, markets 
and services a full line 
of   Ford   cars,   trucks, SUVs, 
electrified vehicles and Lincoln luxury 
 vehicles,  and  is 
 pursuing leadership  positions 
 in  electrified, autonomous 
 vehicles  and  mobility 
solutions.  Ford  Powertrain  
 Manufacturing  Engineering  (PTME),  
Europe is a department of Ford of Europe 
responsible for planning and installing 
production facilities across Europe for 
the manufacture of electric power units, 
transmissions, engines & castings for the 
Ford vehicle line up. Ford has launched 
multiple Industry 4.0 initiatives to 
support the ir business from the initial 
installation to the ongoing running of 
operations.  
FORD have ideated an automated method 
utilising AGVs to undertake the floor 
outlining process generating data and 
eradicating the risks incorrect install location. 
Additionally, post -install verification would 
be undertaken using a laser scanner onboard 
the AGV to collect data to precisely cross -
reference against the planned location. 
However, engineers are reluctant to move 
away from the current manual process due to 
a distinc t lack of trust that the Ind 4.0 
technology could be incorporated 
successfully. This case study, would look to 
leverage the skills of the consortium to 
develop a suitable AGV based system that 
could overcome adoption reluctance and lead 
to lessons that cou ld subsequently be 
deployed to improve the human AGV 
interface across Ford. Therefore, this project 
is appropriately situated at the cross -section 
of Ind4.0 and social sciences.  
  
4.  Ethics Self-Assessment  
 
   Ethical dimension of the objectives, methodology and likely impact  
The work that will be performed as part of Up -Skill project, will not include any clinical trials or involvement of 
children. The proposal is particularly focussing on mapping the skills and training needs of the future workforce 
with increasing adoption of disruptive emerging technologies in industry 5.0. We do not foresee any impact of the 
project’s activities to particular social groups and we do not foresee any creation of political or  financial adverse 
consequences.  
  
 
   Compliance with ethical principles and relevant legislations  
No issues have been identified  
  

 
 
101070666   – Up-Skill Part B         43 of 40  
 
 
Grant Agreement number: 101070666 — Up-Skill — HORIZON-CL4-2021-HUMAN-01 
 
Commission européenne/Europese Commissie, 1049 Bruxelles/Brussel, BELGIQUE/BELGIË - Tel. +32 22991111