4. What roles, tasks and role relationships exist in relation to the production of the focal technology.  
Task 2.2: Ethnographic research period (Lead partner ARU; M11-M22) 
Each academic partner will be responsible for data collection from the case studies in their region with oversight from 
ARU. ARU will also take the role of ensuring coordination between the  data collection by the other partners. 
Delivery of case-study ethnographies by academic individual partners 
- Each case study partner will employ one postgraduate researcher to conduct the ethnographic work and then 
supportthe production of outputs. They will also provide a supervisory team to support and guide the work and 
- The ethnographic research period will run continuously over the period of one-year. In each region the amount 
of timespent on site will depend on the number of employees and related roles ). 
- The ethnographies will begin at the case study site after enabling technologies are in place.  
- The post graduate researcher will be present at their case study research site(s) three days per week.  
- The specific design of production may occasion visits to  other sites as the case study develops – such as in 
cases wheretightly otherwise coupled-production processes take place on different sites. 
- Days not spent on site will be used writing up observations notes and interviews  
Case study coordination and learning between cases 
ARU will ensure the coordination of the individual case -studies to ensure that a) comparable data is collected and b) 
cross-case learning is achieved. 
- Quarterly workshops will be held, face to face or online, in which researchers and their local academic 
supervisors willpresent progress and insights to the whole team for reflection and discussion. This will shape the ongoing 
work of the case studies, ensure comparability between cases and feed into final outputs of all of the cases.  
- ARU will be responsible for recording, storing and integrating workshop insights. 
- Partners will be responsible for storing ethnographic data. 
Each use-case ethnography will involve: 
- Role shadowing, observation, taking fieldnotes in a prescribed and agreed manner (translated into English 
wherenecessary) and taking photographs where possible. 
- Interviewing will also be used as a further means to gain insights into how engineers and skilled artisans do 
their work.Semi-structured qualitative interviews (30 -60 minutes) will be used. The se will also be the primary means 
for accessing managers responsible for design and production work. 
- Interviews will also be the primary means of collecting data on the role networks in which  
- Documentary analysis of company archives and publicly available documents (local/national newspaper 
articles,books). 
Written field notes will also be augmented and improved off-site (e.g. sentences completed, technical terms checked for 
spelling and augmented with supplementary explanations). This will be done to make the notes as accessible as possible 
to the rest of the team. Two days per week are set aside for this work. 
Task 2.3: Detailed case study write-up for Up-Skill platform (Lead partner ARU; M22-M26) 
- The partner will be responsible for writing up the case studies in their region following an agreed format. 
Project: 101070666 — Up-Skill — HORIZON-CL4-2021-HUMAN-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
9 
- Each case write -up will identify how roles are lost, transformed and have content transferred elsewhere as 
aconsequence of technology change. 
Project: 101070666 — Up-Skill — HORIZON-CL4-2021-HUMAN-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
10 
- ARU responsible for coordinating the inputs of partners in the writing of:  
o the initial state of the alert literature review 
o a summary report which brings together main learning points and best practicesfrom across the 
cases showing 
Work package WP3 – USE CASE DEVELOPMENT: Skills vs Quantified Products 
Work Package Number WP3 Lead Beneficiary 11. LUN  
Work Package Name USE CASE DEVELOPMENT: Skills vs Quantified Products  
Start Month 5 End Month  26 
Objectives 
The goal of this WP is to develop case studies within supply chain settings and to review ‘hand built’ products with 
respect to opportunities for data-driven improvements in yield/ultimate performance 
Description 
Task 3.1: Identification of enabling technologies (Lead partner LUN; M5-M7) 
The information gained in WP1 will facilitate the provision of a framework to be used for the development of the different 
use cases. The case study development will follow a 4-step process, the first of which is the identification of technologies 
and process conditions for each of the case studies to be developed. The overall technology  
identification process for each case study will require us to first establish the product or sub-assembly to be made as well 
as the processing steps to be undertaken to develop the selected part. Ethnographic techniques will be used to monitor 
and assess the material handling process, with particular scrutiny on the route for materials  
handling and flow paths. This will enable the identification of the technologies and processing conditions to meet the 
requirements for each of the case studies. 
Task 3.2: Manufacturing workflows (Lead partner LUN; M7-M9) 
With the identification of the key enabling technologies in T3.1, the next stage will be to detail the granular activitylevel 
steps that must be completed to create finished goods (products or sub -assemblies identified in T3.1) from the time raw 
materials are received at the facility until those materials are turned into finished goods for each use case through analysis 
of the manufacturing workflows. This will require us to identify the likely material requirements as well as the assessment 
of machine processing conditions and materials in and out puts. We will also analyse the pre and post processing 
conditions and the finishing and packaging options for the products/sub-assemblies selected for each case study. Finally, 
we assess the impact of ethnography on the identified conditions and likely system improvements  
Task 3.3: Hardware identification and installation (Lead partner TWI; M8-M12) 
Task 3.3 will identify the suitable processing and appropriate hardware to meet the requirements for each case study and 
support its installation. The equipment requirements will be assessed with key stakeholders according to the ethnography 
findings and then we will shortlist the hardware and confirm pricing, T&Cs and recon firm findings/agreements. The 
hardware will then be ordered and installed to align with the WP4 programming.  
Task 3.4: Trial manufacture (with ethnography) (Lead partner TWI; M11 -M24) 
This task will see to the implementation of the case studies based on findings from the previous tasks so as to determine 
the impacts of ethnography based manufacture. For each case study, we will develop a manufacturing strategy, with the 
manufacturing aligned to organizational and behavioural characteristic to develop unique  processing conditions and 
possible end -product eccentricities. The manufacturing trials will be run and the resulting products will be tested to 
obtain feedback from the case study owner, with iterative feedback to the trials. For each case study and base on previous 
findings. 
Task 3.5: Trial feedback back case study (Lead partner LUN; M25-M26) 
In this task, the results and feedback from the different case studies will be gathered and collated for review and  
Project: 101070666 — Up-Skill — HORIZON-CL4-2021-HUMAN-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
11 
reporting with stakeholders. Additional feedback from the stakeholders will also be captured, together with ethnography 
characteristics and programming options for use in the Up-Skill platform. 
Work Package Number WP5 Lead Beneficiary 5. IRIS 
Project: 101070666 — Up-Skill — HORIZON-CL4-2021-HUMAN-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
12 
Work package WP4 – TRAINING NEEDS ASSESSMENT 
Work Package Number WP4 Lead Beneficiary 2. MITC 
Work Package Name TRAINING NEEDS ASSESSMENT  
Start Month 9 End Month 34 
Objectives 
The goal of this WP is extract training needs from previous WP and translate them into training programmes to 
address broader industry. 
Description 
Task 4.1: Digital outcomes and training requirements (Lead partner LUN; M9 -M14) 
Each case study will require its own set of processing conditions, in conjunction with particular ethnography 
requirements. These processing conditions and requirements will en able the bespoke alignment of programming and 
training to address broader industry. We are going to create customised programming for each part or subassembly 
process for each case study’s respective manufacturing cells. 
Task 4.2: Programme training and usage methods (Lead partner MITC; M12-M25) 
For each case study, there will be need for training to use the software packages, for manipulation of the software to 
accommodate changes and for production of different parts. This task will see to the generation of the training manual 
according to each software to be used. The task will also see to the conducting of a relevant course for the partners and 
the overseeing of the in-service conditions and usage by case studies. 
Task 4.3: Hardware training (Lead partner TWI; M14-M25) 
For each case study, there will be need for training to use hardware, for manipulation of the hardware to accommodate 
changes and for production of different parts. In this task, we will generate a training manual for each of the hardware 
(equipment) to be used for the different c ase studies. The task will also see to the conducting of a relevant course for 
the partners and the overseeing of the in-service conditions and usage by case studies. 
Task 4.4: Evaluation of system effectiveness (Lead partner MITC; M26-M30) 
This task will review the implemented software and hardware changes across case studies. To qualify the changes are 
robust, and effective a FATs (Factory Acceptance Testing) methodology will be developed. The FATs document will 
form a checklist of activities to execute across all use cases with stakeholders in order to pass off implemented changes 
and fully evaluate the system 
Task 4.5: Future skills mapping (Lead partner UMIL; M27-M34) 
Each of the case studies will be in a position to assess how existing skilled roles are being, and might further, augmented 
by technology. We will identify the new skills that existing craft workers will need to take on in order to survive in the 
emerging digitalised workplace. Thus, unlike typical skills-mapping exercises, our skills-mapping 
will focus on ‘role survival’ and ‘role re-distribution’, rather than the identifying the skills required for newly emerging 
roles (such as, for example, coding). 
Work package WP5 – UP-SKILL PLATFORM 
Start Month 7 End Month 36 
Objectives 
Work Package Name UP-SKILL PLATFORM   
Project: 101070666 — Up-Skill — HORIZON-CL4-2021-HUMAN-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
13 
Design and requirements definition for data capture and representation. 
Develop data repository, data capture processes and pipelines, populate with data.  
Develop Decision Support System (DSS) using advanced data processing algorithms (AI techniques) 
Validation testing offline/in-laboratory with KPIs. 
Validation testing on-line/in-situ with KPIs and integration with use cases. 
Description 
Task 5.1 Design and requirements definition for data capture and representation (Lead partner IRIS; M7 -M12) 
A study will be performed of all the data sources and requirements for the project. One the one hand, what data sources 
and prior reports, studies a nd existing repositories will be considered to study; and will be necessary for the use cases 
to capture human and robot/machine relationships in the different environments. On the other hand, knowledge in 
different formats and levels (Political, education al, economic, environmental, etc.…) which describe the data sources 
for specific tasks and skills needed by the end users; and considering the evolution/creation/destruction of jobs. The 
design will also make use of the information provided from the WP1 as sessment in order to produce a compendium of 
micro-architectures supporting a global backend -frontend system, including a top user -friendly layer for practical and 
satisfying experience. 
Task 5.2 Data repository development, data capture processes and pipe lines, data population and formatting (Lead 
partner 
IRIS; M10-M24) 
Using the specifications developed in T5.1, the data repository and data capture processes will be implemented. A Case 
Based Reasoning system (based on Artificial Intelligence principles) will provide retrieval of the data, using appropriate 
distance functions to find historical cases closest to new scenarios. Also, soft -sensors can be developed to provide 
enhanced information by processing and aggregating the raw data. This will be performe d in collaboration and 
synchronization with WP3 use case development, also using SWOT methodology for each use case.  
Task 5.3 Decision Support System (DSS) development using advanced data processing algorithms (AI techniques) 
(Lead partner IRIS; M14-M36) 
T5.3.1: DSS and AI algorithms development: Employing the state -of-the-art numerical techniques and efficient 
algorithms, raw data will be processed into higher level information, and fused with different data sources, related to 
the KPIs. Key KPIs will include productivity (time, cost, safety, waste reduction), worker satisfaction, risk assessment, 
among others. Weighted aggregation operators (based on Artificial Intelligence principles) will be used to process data 
from different existing sources, taking in to account reliability and relevance to each of the KPIs and end -user needs. 
Data algorithms will include those KPI considered critical for the industrial jobs’ transformation in the context of the 
fourth industrial revolution (with latency of 30 frames pe r second). This will be performed in collaboration and 
synchronization with WP3 use case development. T5.3.2: Validation of digital tools under lab conditions and in 
association with AI developed techniques: The systems previously developed will be validat ed offline with available 
real historical data which can be supplemented with simulated data as necessary. As the project progresses more data 
will become available and so this task will have an iterative nature, involving all participant partners.  
Task 5.4 Validation testing on-line/in-situ with KPIs and integration with use cases 
(Lead partner IRIS; M28-M36) 
The systems developed in Tasks 5.2 and 5.3 will be validated online in the real use-case environments. The system will 
be deployed and integrated int o the use case environment with installed computer servers via the digital platform for 
local data processing. This will again be performed in collaboration and synchronization with WP3 use case 
development. 
Work Package Number WP6 Lead Beneficiary 7. KNEIA  
Project: 101070666 — Up-Skill — HORIZON-CL4-2021-HUMAN-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
14 
Work package WP6 – EXPLOITATION, DISSEMINATION & COMMUNICATION 
 
Objectives 
The overall WP objectives are: 
Enable potential future exploitation of the project results by disseminating them to the relevant 
stakeholders. 
Ensure project’s findings are widely communicated to the scientific community and the general public.  
Document undertaken and proposed dissemination and communication activities. 
Ensure the project results reach the relevant stakeholders who will use and implement them.  
Guarantee IPR management according to the Guidelines of the EC within the Consortium Agreement 
Ensure clustering and coordination with other related EU/National projects and initiatives.  
Attract business partners and potential stakeholders and to create market demand.  
Description 
Work Package Name EXPLOITATION, DISSEMINATION & COMMUNICATION  
Start Month 1 End Month  36 
Project: 101070666 — Up-Skill — HORIZON-CL4-2021-HUMAN-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
15 
Task 6.1 Communication Activities (Lead partner KNEIA; M1-M36) 
T6.1.1. Communication Plan and reporting on communication: KNEIA will draw up a Communication Plan, as part of 
the PDEC (D6.3), to mobilise stakeholders’ interests and secure their support to the project. This plan will be closely 
linked with the dissemination activities and it will follow the steps described in section 2.2. 
T6.1.2 Project website: The website (D6.1) will serve as communication tool to all target audiences and will house a 
restricted access area for partners to store information and facilitate file sharing and internal communication. The public 
site will present the brand and non -confidential information: concept, partners, core objectives, infographics on the 
strategic, competitive and economic benefits, etc. The platform will enable to dis seminate non -confidential results 
(reports, deliverables, publications as part of our green open access, etc.). At the end of the project, public information 
and results will be kept as the central virtual hub for post-project activities. 
T6.1.3 Communicat ion and promotional materials: Project leaflets, posters, project video (D6.2), newsletters and 
promotional materials (gadgets for tradeshows, etc.) will be designed to support communication and branding efforts. 
At least 2 dissemination videos – an introductory video on month 6 for the general public and a divulgative report video 
at the end of the project describing the final results - will be developed and published on YouTube, the project website, 
and social media, to raise awareness and engage stakeholders with project pilots and to promote uptake after the end of 
the project. These materials will be annexed to the PDEC (D6.3). 
T6.1.4 Social/digital media channels: A social media grid will be drawn up and will plot the most appropriate channels 
for targeting specific audiences. Pages will be designed for each channel and a content maintenance plan will be put in 
place for managing the stream of information to secure and maintain followers. Social and digital media will contribute 
to create ‘communities of support’ to the project. Tools such as Twitter, LinkedIn and YouTube will be used. Visual 
media, videos, animations, icons, inf o-graphics and mobile enabled content and richer content experiences will be 
sought. 
Task 6.2 Dissemination Activities (Lead partner KNEIA; M1-M36) 
A dissemination plan will be developed as part of the PDEC, building on the preliminary plan in Section 2.2 and in 
complete alignment with the principles of Open Science. The following activities will be executed:  
- Publishing at least 6/8 scientific articles in journals and conferences (after preliminary IP protection check);  
- Organising special sessions and scientific workshops as part of large conferences with high impact; 
- Targeted placement of articles and features in relevant trade and industry focused publications;  
- Organisation of the “Up-Skill Agenda” of events spanning the project duration: trade fairs, exhibitions, 
workshops,seminars, conferences, round tables, etc., that the partners are already planning to attend/organise within 
ongoing activities. The target is 24 existing events and organisation of: at least 2 intermediate workshops with brother 
projects and a Final conference (M36), to showcase results and impacts. 
Task 6.3 Exploitation of results, IPR and Business model (Lead partner KNEIA; M12 -M36) 
A draft of the Exploitation Plan will be delivered as part of the PDEC (D6.3). Built on the information already provided 
in Section 2.2, the Exploitation Plan will be structured as follows: 
- The planned key exploitable results and their expected key applications: development status, facts and figures 
thatfacilitate the assessment of the potential impact, diffe rences from existing competing products/services, main IPR 
issues to be clarified in the consortium agreement; 
- The exploitation team: partners involved in the exploitation activities providing information on their 
previousexperience and business interests, complementing external resources if not in the consortium; 
- The market: the potential geographical and economic size of the market, market trends, main competitors 
andcompetitive advantage; 
- Business model including marketing strategy and main clients: will  be elaborated using CANVAS 
methodologyadapted to the relevant target markets. 
Task 6.4 Clustering and Networking activities (Lead partner KNEIA; M1 -M36) 
This task will ensure that Up -Skill is networked with relevant national and international projects, initiatives and 
networks. Networking with other projects will ensure knowledge interchange and reuse between previous and future 
projects. A close interaction with other proposals under the same or closer topics will be ensured. The  
networking plan will take into account projects within international stakeholders and other EU/national projects (as 
identified in Section 1.2). Most of the project partners are members of relevant networks, groups and associations. These 
memberships will promote cooperation and integration with Up -Skill. Members of consortia of the networked projects 
will be invited to the 2 intermediate workshops (T6.2) and exchange of (non-sensitive) information will be implemented 
(e.g., by newsletter or dedicated meetings). At least 2 dissemination events in cooperation with other related projects 
will be organised and included in the Up-Skill Agenda. One section of the 
Project: 101070666 — Up-Skill — HORIZON-CL4-2021-HUMAN-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
16 
Newsletter (T6.1) will be dedicated to the information on other ongoing projects and exchange of newsletters from the 
other connected projects will be pursued. The progress of this task will be reported in the PDEC.  
Task 6.5 Stakeholder analysis and engagement (Lead partner KNEIA; M1-M36) 
The stakeholder analysis (stakeholder mapping) will identify the most important stakeholders and end -users of the 
UpSkill technologies and assess their position towards the project’s results in order to set up engagement s trategies. In 
addition, the partners will jointly work to identify and engage further stakeholders and end -users 
for Up -Skill technological solutions throughout the duration of the project. All stakeholders identified in the initial 
stakeholder analysis will be invited to participate in an online survey designed to measure stakeholder characteristics, 
such as their interest, attitude, influence, knowledge and expectations relevant for the project.  
Based on the outcome of the survey, more targeted dissemination and exploitation actions will be implemented and 
relationships built with key stakeholders to the project. Relevant feedback about stakeholders’ expectations will be 
constantly provided to the project technological developers to be taken into account i n the technology definition and 
upgrade. Survey results will inform the annual revision of the PDEC. 
Work package WP7 – PROJECT MANAGEMENT 
Work Package Number WP7 Lead Beneficiary 1. MDU  
Work Package Name PROJECT MANAGEMENT   
Start Month 1 End Month  36 
Objectives 
This work package deals with the coordination and management of all project activities and reporting to the EC.  
The project will be coordinated by MDU, with the help of a Management Committee, with a representative from each 
consortium partner, which will lead the management of the project, having the authority to make decisions on project 
execution. 
- To coordinate the technological and scientific orientation of the project, to ensure the delivery of the project 
on timeand within the budget and that the project maintains its relevance towards the objectives defined in Section 1.1 
and within the context of each WP. 
. To manage resources, monitor the overall project performance and manage risks (identified in Table 3.2b and any that 
may arise during the project), ethics, and contingencies. 
- Control cost expenditure within authorised budgets for each period by Task/WP and for the entire project 
Description 
Task 7.1 Technical Management (Lead partner TWI, all partners; M1-M36) 
The technical management task will be responsible for monitoring the progress of the technical outcomes of the project, 
with emphasis given on project milestones and deliverables. Steven Baines (Technical Manager) will regularly monitor 
progression of work activities, ensuring that both the general project objectives defined in Section 1.1 and the individual 
work package objectives are met by comparing the estimated baseline against actual performance. Table 3.2a of 
milestones will be used to check the broa d status of the project using the defined means of verification. The Gantt, will 
be useful for an in-depth assessment of project progress (to WP and task-levels) with the deliverables given in Table 
3.1c being a key indicator of project status. Using the Gantt, tasks- and sub-task descriptions in WPs and deliverables, 
Project: 101070666 — Up-Skill — HORIZON-CL4-2021-HUMAN-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
17 
the actual status of the project at any specific time can be compared to baseline schedule to determine if activities are 
ahead or behind schedule. This will allow for reprioritisation of remaining work (if need be) or management of changes 
to project baseline if necessary. 
Within the task, a project quality board will be defined that will undertake the quality assurance of the project outcomes. 
More-over, by continuously monitoring the progress of the project and its alignment with the initial objectives, this task 
will perform also risk management activities, in order to apply contingency actions when necessary. Regarding the risk 
management, the coordinator of the project will: i) ensure the quality of the developed work throughout the project. For 
that purpose, this task will set and implement a quality process covering the quality assurance and control aspects. This 
will include the d efinition of templates for documentation and presentations as well as policies for external 
communication by individual partners on 
project matters, ii) set appropriate mechanisms to identify, anticipate, communicate and mitigate potential risks and 
deviations in the project, iii) ensure the constant and effective workflow among all project participants, formulating and 
implementing a project framework and create related tools for use in the entire project. This  
task includes the set -up of suitable collabor ation and knowledge management and sharing tools to be used within the 
project. 
Task 7.2 Financial Management (Lead partner MDU, all partners; M1-M36) 
The Project Coordinator will be responsible for the financial coordination of the project. This task incl udes establishing 
and maintaining financial records, coordination of costs submission, preliminary checks of individual costs against 
known criteria (contractual commitments, progress reports, and delivery of results) and  
consolidation of costs, follow -up of EC payments, and delivery of all financial documents required periodically by the 
EC. The PC will also follow up the project expenses and track possible deviations. The PC will also be responsible for  
distributing the EC contribution amongst the partners according to the Grant Agreement and the Consortium 
Agreement. 
Task 7.3 Project Reporting (Lead partner MDU, all partners; M1-M36) 
This task deals with the liaison with the EC through the set reporting mechanisms (bi-annual management reports to EC, 
annual Periodic review reports -APRR, final report). The Periodic Management Reports summarize organizational 
documentation and planning p rogress on a management level, which is not covered by the documentation in the 
individual working groups. The project final report is a detailed summary of the periodic progress reports including 
management as well as scientific aspects, the main results of the project and a general evaluation of the project outcome 
from the perspective of the consortium. 
Work package WP8 – Ethics requirements 
Work Package Number WP8  Lead Beneficiary 1. MDU  
Work Package Name Ethics requirements     
Start Month  1 End Month  36 
Objectives 
The objective is to ensure compliance with the 'ethics requirements' set out in this work package.  
Description 
This work package sets out the 'ethics requirements' that the project must comply with.  
Project: 101070666 — Up-Skill — HORIZON-CL4-2021-HUMAN-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
18 
           
LIST OF DELIVERABLES 
Deliverables 
Grant Preparation (Deliverables screen) — Enter the info. 
The labels used mean: 
 Public — fully open (  automatically posted online) 
Sensitive — limited under the conditions of the Grant Agreement 
EU classified —RESTREINT-UE/EU-RESTRICTED, CONFIDENTIEL-UE/EU-CONFIDENTIAL, SECRET-UE/EU-SECRET under Decision 2015/444 
 
Deliverable 
No 
Deliverable Name Work 
Package 
No 
Lead Beneficiary Type Dissemination Level Due  Date 
(month) 
D1.1 State of the art literature review WP1 11 - LUN R — Document, report SEN - Sensitive 3 
D1.2 Ethnographic framework report WP1 10 - ARU R — Document, report SEN - Sensitive 4 
D2.1 Individual case study reports WP2 10 - ARU R — Document, report SEN - Sensitive 9 
D2.2 Summary report that brings together the 
lessons from all of the cases combined 
WP2 10 - ARU R — Document, report SEN - Sensitive 22 
D2.3 Detailed case study ethnographic notes WP2 10 - ARU R — Document, report SEN - Sensitive 26 
D3.1 Report showing the best practice technology 
solutions selected 
WP3 11 - LUN R — Document, report SEN - Sensitive 7 
D3.2 Installed hardware for trial manufacture WP3 9 - TWI DEM — Demonstrator, 
pilot, prototype 
SEN - Sensitive 12 
D3.3 Case study report demonstrating the impact 
of implementation 
WP3 11 - LUN R — Document, report SEN - Sensitive 26 

Project: 101070666 — Up-Skill — HORIZON-CL4-2021-HUMAN-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
19 
D4.1 Training requirements report WP4 2 - MITC R — Document, report PU - Public 14 
D4.2 Hardware and Software training manuals WP4 11 - LUN R — Document, report SEN - Sensitive 25 
D4.3 System effectiveness report WP4 2 - MITC R — Document, report SEN - Sensitive 30 
D4.4 Future skills training content WP4 3 - UMIL R — Document, report PU - Public 34 
 
Deliverables 
Grant Preparation (Deliverables screen) — Enter the info. 
The labels used mean: 
 Public — fully open (  automatically posted online) 
Sensitive — limited under the conditions of the Grant Agreement 
EU classified —RESTREINT-UE/EU-RESTRICTED, CONFIDENTIEL-UE/EU-CONFIDENTIAL, SECRET-UE/EU-SECRET under Decision 2015/444 
 
Deliverable 
No 
Deliverable Name Work 
Package 
No 
Lead Beneficiary Type Dissemination Level  Due  Date 
(month) 
D5.1 Design and requirements specification for 
data capture and representation 
WP5 5 - IRIS R — Document, report SEN - Sensitive 12 
D5.2 Data repository design, implementation and 
population process 
WP5 5 - IRIS R — Document, report SEN - Sensitive 24 
D5.3 Decision Support System design, 
implementation and preliminary testing 
validation; on -line testing in the use -case 
scenarios 
WP5 5 - IRIS R — Document, report SEN - Sensitive 36 
D6.1 Up-Skill project website WP6 7 - KNEIA DEC —Websites, patent 
filings, videos, etc 
PU - Public 6 

Project: 101070666 — Up-Skill — HORIZON-CL4-2021-HUMAN-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
20 
D6.2 Project Videos 1 WP6 7 - KNEIA DEC —Websites, patent 
filings, videos, etc 
PU - Public 6 
D6.3 Project videos 2 WP6 7 - KNEIA DEC —Websites, patent 
filings, videos, etc 
PU - Public 36 
D6.4 PDEC - Plan for the dissemination, 
exploitation and communication activities 1 
WP6 7 - KNEIA R — Document, report PU - Public 6 
D6.5 PDEC - Report on the dissemination, 
exploitation and communication activities 2 
WP6 7 - KNEIA R — Document, report PU - Public 36 
D7.1 Data management plan WP7 1 - MDU DMP — Data 
Management Plan 
PU - Public 3 
 
Deliverables 
Grant Preparation (Deliverables screen) — Enter the info. 
The labels used mean: 
 Public — fully open (  automatically posted online) 
Sensitive — limited under the conditions of the Grant Agreement 
EU classified —RESTREINT-UE/EU-RESTRICTED, CONFIDENTIEL-UE/EU-CONFIDENTIAL, SECRET-UE/EU-SECRET under Decision 2015/444 
 
Deliverable 
No 
Deliverable Name Work 
Package 
No 
Lead Beneficiary Type Dissemination Level  Due  Date 
(month) 
D8.1 OEI - Requirement No. 1 WP8 1 - MDU ETHICS SEN - Sensitive 6 

Project: 101070666 — Up-Skill — HORIZON-CL4-2021-HUMAN-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
21 
Description 
Project: 101070666 — Up-Skill — HORIZON-CL4-2021-HUMAN-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
22 
Deliverable D1.1 – State of the art literature review 
Deliverable Number D1.1 Lead Beneficiary 11. LUN 
Deliverable Name State of the art literature review  
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
Due Date (month) 3 Work Package No WP1 
Description 
This Deliverable will describe the state of the art for Industry 5.0 technologies. A thorough literature review will scope 
the pertinent details of technologies across industries and across readiness’s and applicability of organisations, Potential 
technology gaps to consider include: 
Users current process capabilities. 
Current skills. 
Complexity of operations required. 
Parts or Bill of Materials (BOM) and/or part counts. 
Cycle times 
Processing environment and likely conditions. 
Deliverable D1.2 – Ethnographic framework report 
Deliverable Number D1.2 Lead Beneficiary 10. ARU 
Deliverable Name Ethnographic framework report  
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
Due Date (month) 4 Work Package No WP1 
Description 
The research methods used will be ethnographic involving: shadowing, observing, taking photographs, collecting and 
reviewing relevant documents (e.g. training manuals related to the technology) and interviewing. The data collection 
must also be collected a cross multiple case studies by different researchers. The ‘rules of engagement’ for the 
ethnography will be written down and agreed. 
Deliverable D2.1 – Individual case study reports 
Deliverable Number D2.1 Lead Beneficiary 10. ARU 
Deliverable Name Individual case study reports  
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
Due Date (month) 9 Work Package No WP2 
The Deliverable will cover 
1. What output is being produced by the department / organisation in question and how does this reflect on the 
natureof the production process (e.g. bespoke, low-volume, batch, mass produced). 
2. What markets is the organisation is try ing to operate in (and how does this reflect on the overall strategic and 
businesschoices of the case study organisation. For example, is flexibility and quality traded off against cost and waste. 
3. What is the precise material nature of the technology that is the subject of the case (the focal technology) and 
whathuman skills/level of automation are likely to be encountered? In other words, what inputs/skills are required to 
make it? 
4. What roles, tasks and role relationships exist in relation to the productio n of the focal technology. 
Project: 101070666 — Up-Skill — HORIZON-CL4-2021-HUMAN-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
23 
Description  
Report showing the best practice technology solutions selected  
Deliverable D3.2 – Installed hardware for trial manufacture 
 
Project: 101070666 — Up-Skill — HORIZON-CL4-2021-HUMAN-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
24 
Deliverable D2.2 – Summary report that brings together the lessons from all of the cases 
combined 
Deliverable Number D2.2 Lead Beneficiary 10. ARU 
Deliverable Name Summary report that brings together the lessons from all of the cases combined  
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
Due Date (month) 22 Work Package No WP2 
Description 
Detailed case study write-up for Up-Skill platform 
Writing up of the case studies in the separate regions. 
Each case write-up will identify how roles are lost, transformed and have content transferred elsewhere as a consequence 
of technology change. 
Inputs of partners in the writing of: 
o the initial state of the alert literature review 
o a summary report which brings together main learning points and best practices from across the cases showing  
Deliverable D2.3 – Detailed case study ethnographic notes 
Deliverable Number D2.3 Lead Beneficiary 10. ARU 
Deliverable Name Detailed case study ethnographic notes  
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
Due Date (month) 26 Work Package No WP2 
Description 
Each academic partner will be responsible for data collection from the case studies in their region. Delivery of casestudy 
ethnographies by academic individual partners 
a) comparable data should be collected and 
b) cross-case learning should be achieved. 
Deliverable D3.1 – Report showing the best practice technology solutions selected 
Deliverable Number D3.1 Lead Beneficiary 11. LUN 
Deliverable Name Report showing the best practice technology solutions selected 
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
Due Date (month) 7 Work Package No WP3 
Type DEM — Demonstrator, 
pilot, prototype 
 Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
Due Date (month)  12 Work Package No WP3 
Description 
Deliverable Number D3.2 Lead Beneficiary 9. TWI 
Deliverable Name Installed hardware for trial manufacture  
Project: 101070666 — Up-Skill — HORIZON-CL4-2021-HUMAN-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
25 
Installed hardware for trial manufacture 
The hardware will be ordered and installed to align with the WP4 programming.  
Deliverable D3.3 – Case study report demonstrating the impact of implementation 
Deliverable Number D3.3 Lead Beneficiary 11. LUN 
Deliverable Name Case study report demonstrating the impact of implementation 
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
Due Date (month) 26 Work Package No WP3 
Description 
Case study report demonstrating the impact of implementation 
Deliverable D4.1 – Training requirements report 
Deliverable Number D4.1 Lead Beneficiary 2. MITC 
Deliverable Name Training requirements report  
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level PU - Public 
Due Date (month) 14 Work Package No WP4 
Description 
Training requirements report 
Digital outcomes and training requirements 
Deliverable D4.2 – Hardware and Software training manuals 
Deliverable Number D4.2 Lead Beneficiary 11. LUN 
Deliverable Name Hardware and Software training manuals  
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
Due Date (month) 25 Work Package No WP4 
Deliverable D4.3 – System effectiveness report 
Deliverable Number D4.3 Lead Beneficiary 2. MITC 
Deliverable Name System effectiveness report   
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
Description 
Programme training and usage methods 
For each case study, there will be need for training to use the software packages, for manipulation of the software to 
accommodate changes and for production of different parts. 
For each case study, there will also be need for training to use hardware, for manipulation of the hardware to 
accommodate changes and for production of different parts. 
Project: 101070666 — Up-Skill — HORIZON-CL4-2021-HUMAN-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
26 
Due Date (month) 30 Work Package No WP4 
Description 
System effectiveness report 
This Deliverable will review the implemented software and hardware changes across case studies. To qualify the 
changes are robust, and effective a FATs (Factory Acceptance Testing) methodology will be developed. The FATs 
document will form a checklist of a ctivities to execute across all use cases with stakeholders in order to pass off 
implemented changes and fully evaluate the system 
Description 
Project: 101070666 — Up-Skill — HORIZON-CL4-2021-HUMAN-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
27 
Deliverable D4.4 – Future skills training content 
Deliverable Number D4.4 Lead Beneficiary 3. UMIL 
Deliverable Name Future skills training content  
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level PU - Public 
Due Date (month) 34 Work Package No WP4 
Description 
Future skills training content 
Each of the case studies will be in a position to assess how existing skilled roles are being, and might further, augmented 
by technology. We will identify the new skills that existing craft workers will need to take on in order to survive in the 
emerging digitalised workplace. Thus, unlike typical skills-mapping exercises, our skills-mapping 
will focus on ‘role survival’ and ‘role re-distribution’, rather than the identifying the skills required for newly emerging 
roles (such as, for example, coding). 
Deliverable D5.1 – Design and requirements specification for data capture and 
representation 
Deliverable Number D5.1 Lead Beneficiary 5. IRIS 
Deliverable Name Design and requirements specification for data capture and representation 
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
Due Date (month) 12 Work Package No WP5 
Deliverable D5.2 – Data repository design, implementation and population process 
Deliverable Number D5.2 Lead Beneficiary 5. IRIS 
Deliverable Name Data repository design, implementation and population process 
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
Due Date (month) 24 Work Package No WP5 
Description 
Design and requirements specification for data capture and representation 
THe Deliverable will cover all the da ta sources and requirements for the project. One the one hand, what data sources 
and prior reports, studies and existing repositories will be considered to study; and will be necessary for the use cases 
to capture human and robot/machine relationships in t he different environments. On the other hand, knowledge in 
different formats and levels (Political, educational, economic, environmental, etc.…) which describe the data sources 
for specific tasks and skills needed by the end users; and considering the evol ution/creation/destruction of jobs. The 
design will also make use of the information provided from the WP1 assessment in order to produce a compendium of 
micro-architectures supporting a global backend -frontend system, including a top user -friendly layer for practical and 
satisfying experience. 
Project: 101070666 — Up-Skill — HORIZON-CL4-2021-HUMAN-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
28 
Task 5.2 Data repository development, data capture processes and pipelines, data population and formatting (Lead 
partner 
IRIS; M10-M24) 
Using the specifications developed in T5.1, the data repository and data capture processes will be implemented. A Case 
Based Reasoning system (based on Artificial Intelligence principles) will provide retrieval of the data, using appropriate 
distance funct ions to find historical cases closest to new scenarios. Also, soft -sensors can be developed to provide 
enhanced information by processing and aggregating the raw data. This will be performed in collaboration and 
synchronization with WP3 use case development, also using SWOT methodology for each use case. 
Deliverable Number D6.1  Lead Beneficiary 7. KNEIA 
Deliverable Name Up-Skill project website    
Type DEC —Websites, patent 
filings, videos, etc 
 Dissemination Level PU - Public 
Due Date (month)  6 Work Package No WP6 
Description 
Project: 101070666 — Up-Skill — HORIZON-CL4-2021-HUMAN-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
29 
Deliverable D5.3 – Decision Support System design, implementation and preliminary testing 
validation; on-line testing in the use-case scenarios 
Deliverable Number D5.3 Lead Beneficiary 5. IRIS 
Deliverable Name Decision Support System design, implementation and preliminary testing validation; 
online testing in the use-case scenarios 
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
Due Date (month) 36 Work Package No WP5 
Description 
Decision Support System design, implementation and preliminary testing validation; on -line testing in the use-case 
scenarios 
The deliverable includes 
A description of the DSS and AI algorithms development 
Validation of digital tools under lab conditions and in association with AI developed techniques  
Validation testing on-line/in-situ with KPIs and integration with use cases 
Deliverable D6.1 – Up-Skill project website 
on the strategic, competitive and economic benefits, etc. The platform will enable to disseminate non-confidential results 
(reports, deliverables, publications as part of our green open access, etc.). At the end of the project, public 
information and results will be kept as the central virtual hub for post-project activities. 
Deliverable D6.2 – Project Videos 1 
Deliverable Number D6.2  Lead Beneficiary 7. KNEIA 
Deliverable Name Project Videos 1    
Type DEC —Websites, patent 
filings, videos, etc 
 Dissemination Level PU - Public 
Due Date (month)  6 Work Package No WP6 
Description 
A project video will be launched and published 
Up-Skill project website 
The website (D6.1) will serve as communication tool to all target audiences and will house a restricted access area for 
partners to store information and facilitate file sharing and internal communication.  
The public site will present the brand and non-confidential information: concept, partners, core objectives, infographics 
Description 
Project: 101070666 — Up-Skill — HORIZON-CL4-2021-HUMAN-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
30 
Deliverable D6.3 – Project videos 2 
Deliverable Number D6.3 Lead Beneficiary 7. KNEIA 
Deliverable Name Project videos 2   
Type DEC —Websites, patent 
filings, videos, etc 
Dissemination Level PU - Public 
Due Date (month) 36 Work Package No WP6 
Description 
A second project video will be launched and published 
Deliverable D6.4 – PDEC - Plan for the dissemination, exploitation and communication 
activities 1 
Deliverable Number D6.4 Lead Beneficiary 7. KNEIA 
Deliverable Name PDEC - Plan for the dissemination, exploitation and communication activities 1 
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level PU - Public 
Due Date (month) 6 Work Package No WP6 
The Exploitation plan will cover: 
The planned key exploitable results and their expected key applications: development status, facts and 
figures that facilitate the assessment of the potential impact, differences from existing competing 
products/services, main IPR issues to be clarified in the consortium agreement; 
The exploitation team: partners involved in the exploitation activities providing information on their 
previous experience and business interests, complementing external resources if not in the consortium; 
The market: the potential geographical and economic size of the market, market trends, main competitors 
and competitive advantage; 
Business model including marketing strategy and main clients: will be elaborated using CANVAS methodology adapted 
to the relevant target markets. 
Deliverable D6.5 – PDEC - Report on the dissemination, exploitation and communication 
activities 2 
Deliverable Number D6.5 Lead Beneficiary 7. KNEIA 
Deliverable Name PDEC - Report on the dissemination, exploitation and communication activities 2 
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level PU - Public 
Due Date (month) 36 Work Package No WP6 
Description 
PDEC - Plan for the dissemination, exploitation and communication activities 
The dissemination and communication plan will cover 
- Publishing at least 6/8 scientific articles in journals and conferences (after preliminary IP protection check);  
- Organising special sessions and scientific workshops as part of large conferences with high impact;  
- Targeted placement of articles and features in relevant trade and industry focused publications;  
- Organisation of the “Up-Skill Agenda” of events spanning the project duration: trade fairs, exhibitions, 
workshops,seminars, conferences, round tables, etc., that the partners are already planning to attend/organise within 
ongoing activities. The target is 24 existing events and organisation of: at least 2 intermediate workshop s with brother 
projects and a Final conference (M36), to showcase results and impacts. 
- Also an networking and stakeholder plan will be included. 
Project: 101070666 — Up-Skill — HORIZON-CL4-2021-HUMAN-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
31 
PDEC - Report on the dissemination, exploitation and communication activities 
The dissemination and communication report will cover all performed activities in the dissemination, exploitation and 
communication plan. 
Deliverable D7.1 – Data management plan 
Deliverable Number D7.1 Lead Beneficiary 1. MDU 
Deliverable Name Data management plan   
Type DMP — Data Management 
Plan 
Dissemination Level PU - Public 
Due Date (month) 3 Work Package No WP7 
Description 
The DMP will cover: 
● Types of data/research outputs: definition of dataset units to be produced during the project life span. Each data 
setwill contain, at least the work package to which it belongs and data typology, with a short description.  
● Findability of data/research outp uts: datasets will be stored on Zenodo, automatically becoming part of 
OpenAIRE,the EC-funded initiative supporting the Open Access policy. Each will be assigned a unique identifier.  
● Accessibility of data/research outputs: use restrictions and licensing in formation. Open Access will be 
implementedin peer-review publications, conference proceedings and workshop presentations. 
● Interoperability of data/research outputs: standards used to describe datasets. Proper metadata facilitates the 
use ofthe data by othe rs, makes it easier to combine information from different sources and ensures transparency. 
Metadata of deposited data will be open under a Creative Common Public Domain Dedication (CC 0).  
● Reusability of data/research outputs: the right to access and reuse  digital research data under the terms set out 
in theGrant Agreement will be ensured. The DMP will include information on licensing of data, their availability, re -
use of data, duration of data for re-use and reproducibility of research outputs, among other issues. 
● Curation and storage/preservation: The Exploitation manager will oversee data management, while quality 
control ofeach dataset is the responsibility of every WP leader. Informed consent in data collection and information 
protection in data storage and access will be considered, as well as procedures for longterm preservation of datasets.  
Deliverable D8.1 – OEI - Requirement No. 1 
Deliverable Number D8.1  Lead Beneficiary 1. MDU 
Deliverable Name OEI - Requirement No. 1    
Type ETHICS  Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
Due Date (month)  6 Work Package No WP8 
Description 
Project: 101070666 — Up-Skill — HORIZON-CL4-2021-HUMAN-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
32 
An involvement of an external and independent ethical advisor, who has adequate familiarity with ethnographic research 
and ethical issues, is strongly called for. The ethics advisor will have to identify all ethical issues related to the projec t, 
give guidance to achieve adequate handling, and report the activities and compliance with EU and national regulations.  
The proposal states that a data management plan (DMP) will be produced within the first six months of the project. This 
will enable the collection  of data generated throughout this project and will be essential for achieving any regulatory 
approval. However it is not sufficiently detailed in the Ethics Self -assessment nor in the proposal, a full description of 
ethics procedures for the following ethics issues: 
Section 4: PERSONAL DATA 
Development of case study requirements within manufacturing/production businesses, reviewing skilled roles, customs, 
habits and cultural difference in their approach and identifying SWOT for I5.0 within them. The generated data (per each 
case) feeds in to WP3 and the Up-Skill platform. 
Section 6: NON-EU COUNTRIES 
Potential risks: privacy issues, performance measurement. 
Section 8: ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 
Up-Skill may imply the use of AI (e.g recommendation systems, predictive algorithms). 
Section 9: OTHER ETHICS ISSUES 
The proposed research is likely to yield potentially social or behavioural unexpected or incidental findings that may 
require interventions to safeguard the well being of research participants.  
Project: 101070666 — Up-Skill — HORIZON-CL4-2021-HUMAN-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
33 
LIST OF MILESTONES 
Milestones 
Grant Preparation (Milestones screen) — Enter the info. 
   
Milestone 
No 
Milestone Name Work Package No Lead Beneficiary Means of Verification Due  Date 
(month) 
1 Opportunities/challenges for implementation 
identified 
WP1 1-MDU Completion of the gap analysis through the 
successful analysis of the emerging enabling 
technologies for I5.0: D1.1 & D1.2 
4 
2 Development of case studies within 
manufacturing/production achieved 
WP2 1-MDU Report, identifying opportunities for 
implementation of I5.0 within the case study 
scenarios D2.1 & D2.2 
26 
3 Development of case studies within supply 
chain settings achieved 
WP3 1-MDU Report, identifying opportunities for 
implementation of I5.0 within the case study 
scenarios D3.1 & D3.3 
26 
4 Training programme content ready to deliver 
on a broader EU scale 
WP4 2-MITC Hardware and software training modules 
generated D4.1 & D4.2 & D4.4 
30 
5 Online Up-Skill platform is activated WP5 5-IRIS On-line testing of Up -Skill platform in the 
usecase scenarios (D5.3) 
32 
6 Public Awareness & Dissemination achieved WP6 7-KNEIA Detailed report on dissemination outcomes D6.4 36 
7 Final Exploitation Strategy & Stakeholder 
Engagement available 
WP6 7-KNEIA Detailed report on the exploitation strategy 
completed & stakeholder engagement available 
D6.5 
36 
LIST OF CRITICAL RISKS 
Critical risks & risk management strategy 
Grant Preparation (Critical Risks screen) — Enter the info. 
  
Project: 101070666 — Up-Skill — HORIZON-CL4-2021-HUMAN-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
34 
Risk 
number 
Description Work Package 
No(s) 
Proposed Mitigation Measures 
1 Failure to deliver according to the work plan by 
either of the partners 
WP5, WP8, WP6, 
WP4, WP1, WP7, 
WP2, WP3 
The has been carefully distributed according to 
the strengths and expertise of each of the partners 
to ensure high quality work. Additionally, our 
project monitoring process includes quarterly 
meetings that will facilitate prompt identification 
of delays or failures, allowing the consortium to 
find additional expertise and assign additional 
effort when necessary. 
2 Partner leaves the consortium WP6 In case of Partner’s resignation pending work -load will be either re -distributed among 
Partners on the basis of their competencies or a replacement Partner will be identified. In 
addition, the Consortium Agreement will foresee such situations and will describe measures 
to be taken to prevent non-compliance to project activities 
3 Low quality of project results WP6 The internal review process for all project deliverables and reports will ensure high quality 
project results. 
4 Delays in the tasks’ completion due to lack of 
resources, inability of partners or disharmony in the 
collaboration 
WP6 The work plan of the project has been carefully planned, and the partners have a lot of 
experience in participating in such projects. Coordinator and project management team will 
adopt a proactive approach by identifying all critical paths in the project and by performing 
the necessary rescheduling and crashing 
5 Changes in legislative framework in one or more 
European Countries 
WP6 Continuous monitoring and update of possible adoption of new laws and rules by the 
European Nations 
6 Stakeholders outside the project are not interested WP6 Stakeholders will be contacted early in the project through various communication activities 
in an effort to raise interest throughout the scientific and end user community  
7 Dissemination not sufficient to create a substantial 
impact on the targeted stak eholder groups and 
beyond 
WP6 A significant amount of resources is allocated in the work plan to dissemination and 
exploitation planning (WP5) and thereby guaranteeing the maximum benefit for the partners. 
The partners already have good access to core stak eholders and channels within academic 
and commercial circles. We have planned to participate in most major 
Critical risks & risk management strategy 
Grant Preparation (Critical Risks screen) — Enter the info. 
  
Project: 101070666 — Up-Skill — HORIZON-CL4-2021-HUMAN-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
35 
Risk 
number 
Description Work Package 
No(s) 
Proposed Mitigation Measures 
   conferences and national/international events as well as organizing our own events to present 
the project outcomes. 
8 Networking activities, Open access to generated 
data, models and tests jeopardize IP strategy 
WP6 TWI will consider and evaluate IP risk before the information is being made public or 
delivered to stakeholders through the PUDF. 
9 Poor quality output use case data to translate into the 
Up-Skill training programmes 
WP1, WP2 Pilot sites have already been carefully selected to ensure that they are suitable for the use 
cases. T2.1 will analyse the sites and existing infrastructure so as to guarantee the Use Case 
Requirements during the use case execution. In addition, regular remote meetings will be 
held to check that all use case teams are aligned 
10 Lack of data and/or commitment from 
dataproducing partners 
WP1, WP2 Continuous communication with partners and coordination in order to avoid delays and/or 
absence of data available. 
11 Delays  in  the  platform  and/or 
 algorithm development. 
WP5 Continuous communication and reporting to the coordination, as well as continuous follow 
up of schedule and validations. 
12 Validation in use cases not successful. WP3 Escalate the issue to the project owner. Optimization and reshaping of algorithms and 
digital tool. 
PROJECT REVIEWS 
Project Reviews 
Grant Preparation (Reviews screen) — Enter the info. 
 
Review 
No 
Timing 
(month) 
Location Comments 
RV1 19 tbd  
RV2 36 tbd  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
101070666 – Up-Skill Part B           
History of Changes  
  
Part A  
Version date  Changes  
2022-04-11  Adding researchers (completion of information related with career stage, role and ORCID personal 
identification number)  
  Modification of MDU financial information( raise in the personal cost  from 310,764.00 € to 377,021.00 € 
which automatically led to a raise of the indirect costs from 86,521.00 € to 103,085.00 € ; and therefore 
change in the “requested EU contribution” to to the maximum amount 515,426.25 €   
  Modification of TWI financial information with the corresponding reduction.  
  Adding of workpackages and efforts accordingly to the proposal   
  Adding of related deliverables   
2022-04.12  Modification of the effort in the WP7 regarding MDU and TWI ; instead of 2 (proposal) MDU got 12 and 
TWI instead of 16 (proposal) got 6. The total effort of the WP doesn’t change it’s still 39 (like in the 
proposal)  
  Adding of deliverables in the WP6 be cause two deliverables had two due dates so separated them into two 
deliverables to keep the two due dates. The deliverables that are concerned were :   
→ D6.2 “project videos”due M6,M36 that now became D6.2 “project videos 1” due M6 and  D6.3 “project 
videos 2” due M36  
→ D6.3 “PDEC - Plan for the dissemination, exploitation and communication activities” due M6,M36 that 
now became D6.4 “PDEC - Plan for the dissemination, exploitation and communication activities 1” due M6 
and D6.5 “PDEC - Plan for the dissemination, exploitation and communication activities 2” due M36  
  
  Deleting of one deliverable the D7.2 “final project report” due M36  
  For deliverable D4.3 “System effectiveness report”  the level of dissemination CO wasn´t found on Funding 
and tenders portals so it was changed to SEN instead   
  Adding of all the milestones according to the proposal but the lead beneficiary wasn’t on the proposal so for 
each one of them  the lead Beneficiary is the same as of the related WP  
  Adding of the critical risks accordingly to the proposal  
2022-04-13  Adding of deliverables that could serve as justification for passed milestones   
2022-05-05  Breakdown of the efforts in the WP1, WP2, WP3, WP4, WP5, WP6, and WP7 to make them correspond to 
the sum of partners work according to the Annex 1 description of action (part A) draft   
  Adding of the lead beneficiaries in WP1, WP2 and WP3 according to Annex 1 description of action (part A) 
draft    
  Adding of participating partners in WP8   
  Adding of the lead beneficiaries for the deliverables D1, D2, D3, D4, D5, D6, D7, D8, D10 according to the 
Annex 1 description of action (part A) draft    
  Adding of the lead beneficiaries for the Milestone M1, M2 and M3. According to the Annex 1 description of 
action (part A) draft, the lead beneficiaries were supposed to be respectively TWI, ARU and LUN but on the 
Funding and tenders portal it was not possi ble to select these partners, therefore MDU was put as lead 
beneficiary instead.   
  The UK budget was restored and the budgets and efforts of the remaining beneficiaries were rearranged, to 
allow a larger budget and more PM for the new coordinator  
 
101070666 – Up-Skill Part B           
  The UK beneficiaries were changed into Associate Partners and the numbering of participants was accordingly 
changed  
2022-05-13  Changes in the budget and PM of KNEIA and related changes in the budget of MDU   
2022-05-17  Allocation of Ztift budget and PM to Helekopter AB as well as transferring en block of the tasks and the 
resources of Ztift to HEK without any changes.   
Removal of Ztift from the project   
WP 5 total effort changed from 81.6 to 80.6.  
 WP 6 total effort changed from 83.5 to 72.5.   Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 WP7 
changed from 39 to 45.  
2022-05-25  Modification of the efforts in the WPs back to the proposal version with 2 modifications in WP7 where 
TWI’s 16 PMs go to MDU,  and 2 PMs from ARU go to TWI. Total efforts per respective WP is still in 
accordance to the proposal.  
Modification of the estima ted budget back to the proposal version with 3 modifications: MDUs personnel 
costs and corecponding indirect costs are increased with TWIs budget for the WP7; ZTIFT’s budget 
transferred to HEK; HEK transferred part of the purchase costs budget into personnel costs.  
Modification of Table 3.1h with changing the participant’s numbering and deleting HEK whose tot. purchase 
costs do not exceed 15% of pers. Costs.  
  
Part B  
Version  Changes   
V1.1  General: All references to MDH changed to MDU  
V1.1  State of the Art: Additional text added to improve this section.  
V1.1  Impact: Further detail added here as per ESR.  
V1.1  Participant Table: Updated Coordinator from TWI to MDU and Updated participant 
numbers in anticipation of changes to associated partners  
V1.1  Gantt Chart: Deliverables 7.1 and 7.2, lead changed to MDU from TWI  
V1.1  WP Descriptions  
• WP7: o  Effort Updated for TWI and MDU  
 o  Tasks 7.2 and 7.3 lead beneficiary changed from TWI to MDU  
• WP1-WP7 Beneficiary numbers and efforts realigned in 
accordance with anticipated new beneficiary numbers  
  
V1.1  Table 3.1c: Deliverables 7.1 and 7.2 lead beneficiary changed from TWI to MDU  
V1.1  Removal of beneficiaries table  
V1.1  Added ethics assessment  
  Developping and specifying KPI´s role on criterion 2 impact   
  Changes in Section 2.2.(page 32) : “The communiation strategy will be lead by KNEIA” 
instead of TWI.   
Changes made in the description of social networks and online presence.  
V1.5  Updating in the beneficiaries numbering in the table 3.1h and removal of HEK from the 
table 3.1h  
    
    

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4648166 - 24/06/2022 
101070666 – Up-Skill Part B           
    
    
Table of Contents  
1. EXCELLENCE .................................................................................................................................................................... 4 
 OBJECTIVES AND AMBITION........................................................................................................................................... 4