4. MEMBERS OF THE CONSORTIUM .................................................................................................................................. 57
4.1 PARTICIPANTS ................................................................................................................................................................. 57
4.2 THIRD PARTIES INVOLVED IN THE PROJECT .......................................................................................................................... 104 
5. ETHICS ISSUES .......................................................................................................................................................... 105
5.1 ETHICS ................................................................................................................................................................................ 105
5.2 SECURITY ............................................................................................................................................................................ 106 
6. ADDENDUM 1. BUSINESS CASES ................................................................................................................................ 107 
7. ADDENDUM 2. ADVISORY LETTERS ............................................................................................................................ 123 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ref. Ares(2020)7283543 - 02/12/2020
 
 
BIO-BASED INDUSTRIES 
Joint Undertaking 
www.bbi-europe.eu 
 
 
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B -2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
List of abbreviations: 
 
MSW: municipal solid waste 
AD: anaerobic digestion 
OFMSW: organic fraction of municipal solid waste 
PHA: polyhydroxyalcanoates 
scl-PHA: short chain polyhydroxyalcanoates 
mcl-PHA: medium chain polyhydroxyalcanoates 
PHB: polyhydroxybutyrate  
PHV: polyhydroxyvalerate 
VFA: Volatile fatty acid 
MCFAs: Medium-chain fatty acid 
LCFAs: Long-chain fatty acids 
LCA: Life cycle assessment 
LCC: Life cycle cost  
TEA: techno-economic assessment  
VOCs: volatile organic compounds 
PLA: Polylactic acid 
HRAP: High rate algal pond 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BIO-BASED INDUSTRIES 
Joint Undertaking 
www.bbi-europe.eu 
 
 
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B -3 
 
 
 
 
History of changes 
 
Next table specifies the changes introduced into Part A or Part B of Annex 1 Description of the Action (DoA). It is included in the 
description of the change the section in which it has been done the modification. 
Table 0. History of changes 
 
Date Part 
A 
Part 
B Description of the change 
16-01-2017 x  
Implementation of shortcoming Nr. 2 (section 1.3.5.) in Part A of DoA. In particular, the table 3.2 Risk and mitigation 
during project managment has been removed from section 3.2.2. in Part B and has been included in Part A (section 
1.3.5.) with further technical risks and mitigation measures. 
16-01-2017  x 
Implementation of shortcomings Nr. 1 (in section 3.4, further description of resources for WP2, WP4 and WP8) and 
Nr. 3 (in section 1.3.2., futher description of resources required to advance key technologies at TRL5), both in Part 
B of DoA 
16-01-2017 x x 
It has been removed the next tables from section 3.1 in part B: List of Work packages, List deliverables, Work 
package descriptions. Those tables  have been implemented in Part A (sections 1.3.1, 1.3.2, 1.3.3). Table List of 
deliverables has been modified and each deliverable is linked now to a due date and consist of only one single 
document 
16-01-2017 x x It has been removed the next table from section 3.2 in part B: List of Milestones. That table has been implemented 
in Part A (section 1.3.4).  
16-01-2017 x x It has been removed the next table from section 3.4 in part B: Project efforts in person months. That table has been 
implemented in Part A (section 1.3.6).  
16-01-2017 x  Deliverables of Periodic project management reports (D8.1, D8.2, D8.3 and D8.4) and Final Report on project 
management (D8.4) have been removed from the table List of Deliverables included in Part A (section 1.3.2). 
18-01-2017 x  It has been removed the Periodic and final reports in the Description of Work Package 8 (section 1.3.3) in Part A.  
18-01-2017 x  It has been corrected the percentage of yields in the Table of Milestones (Milestone M3.2 and M3.4, section 1.3.4) 
according to the full description of Workpackages (section 1.3.3, WP3) in Part A.  
18-01-2017 x x It has been replaced the word "proposal" by "project" in Part A and B of DoA.  
19-01-2017  x It has been corrected the percentage of yields in the Table 1.1.b (section 1.1.) in Part B according to the full 
description of Workpackages (section 1.3.3, WP3) in Part A. 
20-01-2017  x 
It has been included a table 3.4.c with a description of the total additional investments by the consortium members 
(section 3.4) in Part B of DoA. Table 3.4c Overview of the total additional investments performed by the consortium 
members 
20-01-2017 x x It has been replaced the name of the partner "IRIS Advanced Engineering Ltd." by "Visum Ltd." (Short name: 
VISUM) in Part A and B of DoA. 
23-01-2017  x It has been diferentiated between subcontracting and contracting costs in table 3.4.b. Contracting costs have been 
transferred to table 3.4.a.  
07-03-2017  x Part of the “other direct costs” and “subcontracted” costs have been transferred from the budget of BCM to the 
budgets of the “non-profit” partners. 
06-04-2017  x GEACAM is included as third party of IRIAF (4.2). The costs of GEACAM are detailed in table 3.4a  
7-04-2017 x  Person months of IRIAF has been updated. 
15/11/2018 
 
 x Figures 1.1c and 1.3a have been corrected. Biogas only comes from AD2. Vinasses feed AD2, not AD1. 
x x The size of the algal pond has been changed from 300 to 273 m 2 along the whole document. 
 
 
BIO-BASED INDUSTRIES 
Joint Undertaking 
www.bbi-europe.eu 
 
 
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B -4 
 
 
x x GID has been replaced by CSIC in the whole documents except for WP1 description where it contributed. 
x x The AD2 unit size has been updated from 200 to 40 m 3 in the whole document. 
 x The state of the art regarding the use of bioethanol as building block for the production of bioethylene has been 
updated (section 1.4.1.) 
 x Table 1.4a has been updated according to CSIC’s bioethylene technology and process.  
 x Table 2.2a has been updated with CSIC’s dissemination actions  
 x Figure 3.1b Gantt chart, has been updated according to the new schedule foreseen for WP2, WP3 and WP4.  
 x Table 3.1c has been updated with CSIC’s business 
 x Figure 3.2a has been updated (GID removed and CSIC added) 
 x Table 3.3a has been updated with CSIC’s role, and GID removed. 
 x Section 3.4. WP4 has been updated according to WP4 tasks. Also the time of operation has been corrected to 26 
months.  
 x Table 3.4a regarding other costs budget has been updated for AINIA, URBASER, UVA, EXERGY, CIEMAT, WR 
and CSIC. GID’s and CSIC’s figures must be updated once the termination of GID has been closed.  
 x Table 3.4b, subcontracting has been updated for AINIA, WUR, URBASER and CSIC. GID has been removed.  
 x Table 3.4c, the additional investments table has been updated for URBASER and the total amount. GID has been 
removed 
 x Section 4.1. CSIC description has been added. 
x  List of participants has been updated. GID has been marked as terminated and CSIC as new partner (Partner No. 
17) 
x  Section 1.3.1 List of workpackages has been updated the person-month for each WP due to man-effort changes  
x  Section 1.3.2 WT2 List of deliverables. The due dates for Deliverables 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 3.1, 3.2, 3.3, 3.4, 5.1, 6.1, 6.2 
and 6.3 have been updated. Dates have been also corrected in the corresponding WPs. 
x  Person-months have been adjusted in all WPs according to the new forecast for CSIC and EXERGY 
x  Tasks 2.1, 2.5, 3.1, 4.1 and 4.2 have been updated 
x  Section 1.3.4 List of Milestones. M2.1, M6.1, M6.2 have been updated the due month. Milestone M6.3 has been 
allocated to BPe instead of EXERGY 
x  Section 1.3.5. Risk table has been updated for existing risks and added new unforeseen risks  
x  Section 1.3.6. Summary table of project effort has been updated 
26/02/2019 x x 
All deadlines after project suspension (8th of August 2018) have been modified throughout the whole document to 
include the suspension duration due to Participant Portal platform limitations. Milestones, Deliverables, Work 
Packages, etc have been virtually extended 7 months. Virtual duration of the project is 55 months. 
08/06/2020 
x  IRIS and LEYGATECH have been included in list of beneficiaries table in page 1 as well as in the relevant WP 
descriptions. 
 x IRIS and LEYGATECH descriptions have been included in section 4.1 of Part B 
x x Partner SES was changed to its substituting partner LEYGATECH throughout the entire document . New partner 
LEYGATECH substitutes SES as partner in relevant WPs 5 to 8 descriptions . 
x  SES end date changed to M38 in list of beneficiaries table.  
x x 
EXERGY termination date has been added to the beneficiaries’ list. All tasks from EXERGY since its termination 
have been transferred to AINIA. Changes have been made in all relevant WPs, deliverables, milestones, 
ownership and exploitation references and financial figures. Effort has been modified in the WPs and in the Effort 
Table in Part A for AINIA accordingly.   
 x 
Costs for VISUM and IRIS have been modified. VISUM’s costs have been modified following a request from the 
company to increase their final reported costs due to an internal accountancy error by the time of the interim 
report. IRIS has reduced and adjusted the effort and budget according to an internal revision and adjustment of 
the activities remaining until the end of the project.  
x  Effort distribution updated in the WP descriptions in Section 1.3.3 as well as in section 1.3.6. for several 
partners(page 24): AINIA, UVa, VISUM, IRIS, SES, EXERGY, GID, CSIC, LEYGATECH. 
 
 
BIO-BASED INDUSTRIES 
Joint Undertaking 
www.bbi-europe.eu 
 
 
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B -5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
x x VISUM changed to IRIS throughout the entire document except to related finished actions before VISUM’s 
termination  
 x VISUM’s end date changed to M22 in list of beneficiaries table 
 x VISUM and IRIS roles were specified in table 3.3a. 
 x Deliverables D8.1, D8.2 to be removed from PPortal. D8.3 moved to Month 64 and left in SEDIA to avoid a 
validation error of WP8. D8.3 refers to the Final Report to be submitted by Month 67.  
x  Submission dates for several deliverables and milestones modified in respective tables of DoA part A, as well in 
the respective tables after each WP description. 
x  2nd Periodic Report ends in Month 47, instead of Month 43 (delayed due to COVID-19) 
 x FGUVA’s description and role included as a Third party for Uva in section 4.2  
 x Figure 3.2a updated to remove VISUM and SES and include IRIS and LEYGATECH 
 x Table 3.4a Other costs table has been updated for the following partners: IMECAL, AINIA, UVa, URBASER, 
CSIC, VISUM, IRIS, EXERGY, SES, LEYGATECH and CIEMAT.  
 x Table 3.4b Summary of subcontracting costs for CSIC has been updated 
 x BCM has been a third party providing in-kind contributions against payment in section 4.2, as reported also in the 
first interim report. 
 x Section 4.1 has been updated for some partners (update of the main staff) 
x x 
In WP3 description, explanatory remarks concerning the nature of the fatty acids obtained by elongation have 
been included along the text, since both MCFA and LCFA (medium- and long-chain fatty acids) might be 
produced through the biological elongation of VFAs. However, since Pseudomonas putida has the ability to cut 
both types of fatty acids to form the precursors of mcl-PHA as required, the quality and quantity of the final 
bioproduct expected will not be compromised. 
Concerning Tasks 3.2 and 3.3 timeline for implementation, as referred already in COVID-19 report (See Annex II, 
WP3), a brief explanation has been included in DoA Part B Section 1.3.4.  
x x Table 3.1b Gantt Chart was updated to include the new partners/roles as well as to reflect the 9 months extension 
approved due to COVID-19 crisis  
x  
The lead partners of some milestones have been corrected in SEDIA. Milestones concerned are ML5, ML7, ML8, 
ML9, ML13 and ML14. This was a previous mistake. The proposal does not refer to lead partners, so the 
milestones were allocated automatically to the WP leader instead of the right partner. Now we have corrected it.  
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 6 
 
 
1. Excellence
1.1 Objectives  
With the rapid growth and development of the human population, municipal solid waste (MSW) has contributed significantly to 
the total amount of waste generated by our society. Today in Europe, each person generates, in average, 475 kg of MSW every 
year1, this amount increasing at an annual rate of 10%. Around 40-50% of this amount correspond to bio-waste (food and kitchen 
waste fr om households, restaurants, caterers and retail premises, comparable waste from market areas and biodegradable 
garden and park waste),2 so that a total biomass of more than 100 million tons derived from MSW is yearly produced in the EU. 
There are two major streams: green waste/pruning residues (including 50 -60% water and lignocellulosic materials) and kitchen 
waste (no wood and up to 80% water). This organic fraction mainly contains carbohydrates (30 -40% cellulose, hemicellulose, 
starch, pectins), proteins  (5-15%) and lipids (10 -15%), which are all useful raw material that can be converted to biobased 
products. The valorisation of organic MSW not only helps to solve environmental pollution but also contributes to the transit ion 
from a linear to a renewable circular economy. 
Due to the increasingly restrictive MSW management legislation 3 in the last years there has been a strong shift from MSW 
landfilling to recycling of materials such as glass, plastics, paper or metals (11%) and energy production from the combustible 
fraction through incineration (26%). Digestion and composting (16%) have also contributed to the reduction of the biodegradable 
fraction of MSW sent to landfill1. It is estimated that the AD of the total organic fraction of municipal solid waste (OFMSW) produced 
in the world could generate enough biogas to contribute around 2% of the global energy consumption. However, despite this great 
AD potential to recover ene rgy, conventional AD only generates single low -value products, biogas and compost (Figure 1.1a). 
Almost 20 years later the Landfill Directive 1999/31/EC, and after the publication of the revised Waste Framework Directive 
2008/98/EC it is mandatory to impro ve the management of bio -waste in EU by supporting technical solutions that are able to 
generate higher value products. 
 
Figure 1.1a Current scenario for MSW treatment. 
 
This trend has been recently reinforced through the recent publication of the Circular Economy package COM(2015) 614 final of 
December 2, 2015 , Closing the loop an EU Action Plan for the Circular Economy (http://ec.europa.eu/environment/circular-
economy/index_en.htm) that includes the proposal for the modification of the Landfill, Waste Framework and Packaging Directives 
among others. A careful analysis of the baseline situation at EU -28 level about generation, collection, management and related 
policies ab out the MSW will be the starting point to evaluate how this biowaste flow could be diverted from actual local 
management systems into the proposed biorefinery/valorisation chain.  
The aim of URBIOFIN project is to demonstrate the techno -economic and environmental viability of the conversion of 
10 tonnes per day of the organic fraction of MSW (OFMSW) into: 
➢ Chemical building blocks (bioethanol, medium or short volatile fatty acids, biogas), 
➢ Biopolymers (low and medium chain polyhydroxyalcanoates, composites combining different PHA) 
➢ Additives (bioethylene, microalgae derived biochemicals). 
By using the biorefinery concept applied to MSW (urban biorefinery), URBIOFIN will exploit the OFMSW as feedstock, 
taking into account its heterogeneity and variable composition, to produce at semi -industrial scale different valuable 
marketable products (Table 1.1a). The processes involved in the development of these bioproducts will be 
interconnected so that a versatile and efficient biorefinery for OFMSW will be demonstrated (Figure 1.1b,c). URBIOFIN 
will offer a new feasible and more sustainable scenario alternative to the current treatment of the OFMSW. 
The project will validate the whole value chain (Figure 1.1b) at demonstration scale, taking into account the involvement of waste 
management authorities (URBASER and Municipalities) and the validation of the targeted products by end-users (LEYGATECH, 
 
1 http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/Municipal_waste_statistics 
2 Managing Municipal Solid Waste, EEA Report No2/2013 
3 Landfill Directive 1999/31/EC, Waste Framework Directive 2008/98/EC 
MSW Sorting OMSW Anaerob. Dig
Composting
LandfillAgriculture
Compost
Electricity NetworkIncineration
CHP
Biogas
Heat
Power
Non organic
(recycling)
MSW Sorting OMSW Anaerob. Dig
Composting
LandfillAgriculture
Compost
Electricity NetworkIncineration
CHP
Biogas
Heat
Power
MSW Sorting OMSW Anaerob. Dig
Composting
LandfillAgriculture
Compost
Electricity NetworkIncineration
CHP
Biogas
Heat
Power
Non organic
(recycling)
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 7 
 
 
BPE and NATRUE). In addition, the project is clearly related with the b ioeconomy purposes of European Union (Figure 1.1b, in 
green 2nd picture) since the objective is going from a fossil -based economy to obtain certain products towards  a bioeconomy 
approach. At the same time the objectives of the project are aligned to RIS3 strategies from all European regions involved. 
   
Figure 1.1b Value-chain for MSW as renewable substrate and project position in bioeconomy  
Therefore the targeted products according to previous value-chain diagram will be in the URBIOFIN biorefinery will be: 
Table 1.1a Targeted biobased products to be obtained at demo scale during URBIOFIN project  
Biobased product Use/final application 
Bioethanol Chemical building block for bioethylene production and VFAs elongation 
Medium- or long-chain fatty acids (MCFAs/LCFAs) Chemical platform for mcl-PHA production 
Biogas Chemical building block for scl-PHA 
Bioethylene gas Ripening Gas in Post-Harvest Fruit Chambers 
Short chain polyhydroxyalcanoates (scl-PHA) Bioplastic for packaging  
Medium chain polyhydroxyalcanoates (mcl-PHA) Agriculture Bioplastic and use for household bags  
Biocomposites of scl and mcl-PHA Cosmetic and hygienic applications 
Aminoacids rich liquid fertiliser High added value liquid biofertilisers 
Dry Organic-Mineral Granules Solid Biofertiliser 
Therefore the evolution of the Figure 1.1a throughout this project will be to the following figure 1.1c . In contrast to the 
current MSW treatment, the URBIOFIN concept (see figure 1.1c) proposes a global approach that regards OFMSW as a promising 
new raw material for a higher added-value production. Thus, the URBIOFIN concept consists of an integrated biorefinery for 
the valorisation of OFMSW  to high -value products  treating at least 10 tonnes per day (during the project will be 
processed more than 3,000 tonnes), such polyhydroxyalcanoates (PHA) and bioethylene and chemical building blocks 
as bioethanol, volatile fatty acids and biogas. In this way the URBIOFIN concept  will include the following improvements to 
the baseline treatment plant: (1) the two -phase AD unit, aimed to obtain volatile fatty acids (VFAs) in the first stage and also 
biogas as chemical building block in the second stage  to produce PHA or biomethane (as final fuel for vehicles) ; (2) use of the 
bioethanol produced from the OFMSW for elongation of VFA to medium / long-chain fatty acids (MCFA/LCFA) that could represent 
a final product for cosmetic applications or a precursor for PHA production 3) Use of the bioethanol to produce Ethylene for fruit 
ripening  4) Use the VFA as carbon -source for PHA enrichment step 5) Use of the MCFA/LCFA as carbon-source for PHA 
accumulation as medium chain length PHA via pure culture. 6) Use of the VFA as carbon-source for PHA accumulation as short 
chain length polyhydroxyalcanoates and scl-PHA products via mixed culture 7) Use of the digestate from the second stage and 
the residual biomass from the later PHAs process to obtain solid fertilizers 8) Use of the microalgae biomass from the biogas 
upgrading process to produce aminoacids for high-value liquid fertilizers 9) Use of the biogas as carbon-source for PHA production 
in order to obtain bioplastics to be used for packaging/agriculture/household bags and 10) the mentioned mcl-PHA and scl-PHA’s 
in combination with various cellulose- and  lignin-containing pulp and other solid materials deriving from MSW will be applied to 
create a new biocomposite material. 
 
 
 
 
MSW
Pretreatment
Cell factories
Production plants
Application (market)
Renewable source
Feedstock
Bioprocesses: SSF, 2P-AD, 
Fermentation, Microalgae
Biochemicals: Etylene, 
scl-PHA, mcl-PHA, fertilisers
(liquid/solid)
Agriculture,
Cosmetics, 
Bags…
MSW Pretreatment Cell factories Plants Market
MSW
Pretreatment
Cell factories
Production plants
Application (market)
Renewable source
Feedstock
Bioprocesses: SSF, 2P-AD, 
Fermentation, Microalgae
Biochemicals: Etylene, 
scl-PHA, mcl-PHA, fertilisers
(liquid/solid)
Agriculture,
Cosmetics, 
Bags…
MSW Pretreatment Cell factories Plants MarketMSW Pretreatment Cell factories Plants Market

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 8 
 
 
 
Figure 1.1c Diagram of URBIOFIN project, showing the bio-based product lines 
In order to deliver on the above, the specific objectives that will be fulfilled over the course of URBIOFIN are discussed below: 
Table 1.1.b URBIOFIN objectives and performance indicators based on milestones 
Objective 1. To evaluate the heterogeneity and compositional variability of the OFMSW  for the design of the 
biorefinery and select representative feedstock (linked to WP1) 
The main challenge to use the organic fraction of MSW as feedstock for bio -based industries lies in its high complexity and 
variability in composition. The three main factors affecting th is variability are the type of waste collection system, the 
geographic location and seasonality. In URBIOFIN project, the biorefinery processes will be designed and adapted taking into 
account this non-homogeneous feedstock and its compositional variability, as well as the presence of inhibitors to downstream 
biotechnological processes in order to assure its industrial feasible conversion into bio-based products. Representative MSW 
samples will be studied and selected for the biorefinery demonstration activities. 
Performance indicator: Milestone 1  
Objective 2. To define the industrial requirements in terms of final bioproducts properties (Linked to WP1) 
It will be defined in detail the requisites (purity, technical properties of biopolymers, N and C content of biofertilisers, legislative 
requirements, etc.) that the bioproducts developed must fulfil to satisfy the requirements of final users in order to facilitate 
future commercialisation. 
Performance indicator: Milestone 2 
Objective 3. To reduce the operational costs of the bioethanol production from OFMSW by 20% (linked to WP2) 
Some of the bioethanol pilot plant modules (pre-treatment, simultaneous fermentation and sacharification modules, bioethanol 
separation units) will be adapted to the new feedstock conditions in order increase the bioethanol yield to be used as a 
chemical building block for bioethylene production. As one of its goals for the adaptation of these modules is to reduce 10% 
the energy costs of the plant . New monitoring technologies will improve the performance of the plant control by obtaining 
relevant parameter information through advanced sensors and adding an intelligent plant control platform. Novel customized 
enzymes cocktails for OFMSW developed by NOVO partner will improve the liberation of fermentable sugars from 65 to 80%, 
while minimising the presence of inhibitors to downstream processes.  
With the implementation of all these actions it is aimed to reduce the current state-of-the-art operational costs for bioethanol 
production from OFMSW by 20%.  
Performance indicator: Milestone 3 
Objective 4. To demonstrate at semi -industrial scale the viability for the continuous conversion of bioethanol 
produced from the OFMSW into bioethylene (linked to WP2) 

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 9 
 
 
The continuous catalytic conversion of bioethanol from OFMSW into bioethylene will be demonstrated at semi -industrial-
scale. The process will be evaluated in technological terms to certif icate industrial feasibility. Target yield is up to 99% for 
bioethylene. Bioethylene produced will be in compliance with international standards and market regulations, and with 
comparable costs to comparable existing products to ensure future commercialisation. 
Performance indicator: Milestone 4 
Objective 5. To demonstrate at semi -industrial scale the continuous VFA production from partial AD of OFMSW 
(WP3) 
Demo-scale prototype for two phase AD system integrating hydrolytic and Methanogenic reactor will be developed in the 
project to treat OFMSW. At least 20g of VFA/L should be achieved in the first stage and degradation of 70% of soluble COD 
in the Methanogenic step is expected in the project. 
Performance indicator: Milestone 6 
Objective 6. To validate at semi-industrial scale at least 50-60% of operational yields for MCFA and PHA production 
at semi-industrial scale (WP3) 
Demo-scale prototype for production scl -PHA and mcl-PHA will be validated. On the  one hand directly from VFA from AD 
throughout two processes of enrichment of biomass and use this biomass to accumulate scl -PHA using always mix culture, 
and in the other hand throughout elongation of VFA to MCFA /LCFA with Cryptococcus or direct Ps eudomonas-mediated 
fermentation, to produce biomass and accumulation with pure culture. The expected yields will be around 40 -50% for scl-
PHA of biomass containing PHA and higher values (up to  
50-70%) for mcl-PHA. The final amount of both PHA types will be around 0.5 tonnes per year. 
 Performance indicator: Milestones 7 and 8  
Objective 7. To validate at semi-industrial scale PHA extraction process (WP3) 
PHA extraction based on combination of mechanical disruption with bead mills and enzymatic treatment will be applied to 
extract the PHA coming from scl-PHA (from VFA or biomethane) or for mcl-PHA. In all the cases the objective will be recover 
at least 60% of the accumulated PHA with good properties for further applications. 
Performance indicator: Milestone 9 
Objective 8. To validate at semi-industrial scale biogas upgrading using microalgae (WP4) 
Technological prototype for integral biogas upgrading, which combines the conversion of a MSW by-product into a consumer 
product (i.e. biogas into biomethane), the treatment of a waste effluent from anaerobic digestion (digestate is used as nutrient 
source and thus carbon and phosphorous contents are reduced by > 70%, with nitrogen reductions > 90%) and the production 
of a microalgae biomass (biomass productivities of 11 -13 g m -2d-1) for further revalorization as biofertiliser. The final 
biomethane will comply with current legislation (CH4>95%, CO2<2.5%, H2S<5 mg S m-3, O2<1%) to be used as a consumer 
product for natural gas grid injection or as vehicle fuel. 
Performance indicator: Milestone 10 
Objective 9. To produce new bio-based material coming from biogas (WP4) 
The novel two-stage process will be able to completely remove the H 2S and ~90-95% of the CH 4 contained in the biogas, 
producing ~0.7 g biomass per g of CH 4 treated. Under optimum operating conditions, the methanotrophic community will 
achieve a PHA accumulation capacity over 60% (w/w).  
Performance indicator: Milestone 11.  
Objective 10. To produce final marketable products from the bio-based chemicals, polymers and additives obtained 
in URBIOFIN biorefinery  and validate their performance (linked to WP5) 
In order to validate the whole value chain the bioproducts obtained in URBIOFIN biorefinery will be utilized by possible end 
users. Bioethylene will be used as ripening gas in post-harvest fruit chambers. PHA polymers will be used to produce plastic 
bags and agriculture plastic films, as well as cosmetic packaging. Dry granules fermented-digested solid fraction of OFMSW 
and aminoacids from microalgae will be tested as biofertiliser. Biomethane will be used directly as end -product or as PHA 
precursor depending on business plan (different countries have different pri ces for biomethane that can compensate or not 
going to other products). The performance of all these developed final products will be validated to demonstrate that they 
satisfy their expected functions. 
Performance indicator: Milestones 13, 14 and 15 
Objective 11. To demonstrate the technical, environmental and economic viability of the developed processes and 
products in URBIOFIN biorefinery as well as regulatory compliance (WP6) 
Life cycle assessment (LCA) and life cycle cost (LCC) along with techno -economic assessment (TEA) will be performed on 
the processes developed for the selected bioproducts in order to prove the reduction of environmental and economic impact 
vs. current traditional materials  and processes. Issues regarding health risks and regulatory assessment will be  studied, 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 10 
 
 
analysed and addressed during the projec t with the aim to ensure the compliance of the processes an d products from 
URBIOFIN project. T echno-economic viability of the b iorefinery with inputs from previous WPs will be evaluated  and 
optimised. 
Performance indicator: Milestones 16, 17 and 18 
Objective 12. To deliver the impacts of the URBIOFIN project for enabled innovation in the European biobased 
industries (WP7) 
Exploitation plans for sustaining the URBIOFIN concept beyond the project period will be created, whereby the vision is to be 
the key driver of the bioeconomy innovation in Europe. T his vision will be supported by a strong dissemination strategy to 
raise awareness about bioproducts derived from OFMSW among the bio-based industries and the general public. Business 
plans will be developed for the developed bioproducts to facilitate thei r market entry. Effective knowledge management 
activities will maximise IP potential. Engagement with Waste Management Authorities and Bio-based industry clusters will be 
promoted. 
Performance indicator: Milestones 19, 20 and 21.
1.2 Relation to the work programme   
The URBIOFIN project relates to the topic BBI 2016.D6: Valorisation of the organic content of Municipal Solid Waste and 
contributing to the renewable circular economy . In particular the project addresses one of the BBI 2016  priorities, which is 
the “Development of biorefinery technologies and efficient processes to increase the competitive position of the bio -based 
industries in Europe” (Scientific Priority 2). This includes the implementation of technologies to enable the processing of a variety 
of biomass feedstock, the optimisation of production routes for 2nd generation bio-based chemicals and intermediates in order to 
effectively replace 1 st generation sugars and the optimisation of bioprocesses, including bio -catalysis operations, by improving 
yields and cost competitiveness as compared to state-of-the-art. 
In order to effectively respond to the identified challenge we have mobilised a strong industry-academia partnership that integrates 
the required technologies and ski lls. Table 1.2a provides a summary of how URBIOFIN addresses the specific challenge and 
scope of BBI 2016.D6 topic. 
Table 1.2a How URBIOFIN addresses the scope and challenges of the BBI 2016.D6 topic  
Challenges of BBI 2016.D6 How URBIOFIN addresses these challenges 
To demonstrate the large -scale, economically competitive 
deployment of treatment and conversion technologies of the 
organic fraction of MSW into final or intermediate products for 
identified further use 
Data from WP2 to WP5 will help to analyse both the technical and the 
economical capacities of conversion of OFMSW into intermediate or final 
products in the integration process. 
The work plan of the project foresees specific activities aimed to provide proof 
of economic and industrial feasibility for the proposed technology at 10 tonnes 
per day. Addressed in WP6 integration 
The developed approach should be robust and able to tackle 
the issues inherent to MSW treatment, such as variability in 
composition (among others seasona lity and geographic 
location) and presence of inhibitors to downstream 
biotechnological processes 
A comprehensive municipal waste study will be developed in the first WP 
including the analysis of all “issues” and the possible risk and mitigations 
measurements related to them. In WP1 at URBIOFIN project, the biorefinery 
processes will be designed and adapted taking into account this non -
homogeneous feedstock and its compositional variability, as well as the 
presence of inhibitors to downstream biotechnologic al processes in order to 
assure its industrial feasible conversion into bio -based products. Addressed 
in WP1 
Proposals should validate the whole value chain at 
demonstration scale (TRL 5 -6-7), with the direct involvement 
of waste management authorities an d end -users of the 
targeted products. 
The development of the different URBIOFIN modules so far is TRL 5-6, that is, 
it has been validated by SME, large industries and R&D partners proposing 
the project (i.e., IMECAL, URBASER, AINIA, WR, etc.) with both synthetic and 
real wastes at lab and pilot -scale level. Within the project, the systems 
composing the process will be further evolved, up -scaled and integrated in a 
demo-scale prototype at TRL of 7. The pilot will be sized to treat around 10 
tonnes per day. 
The demonstration will be conducted in the CLAMBER Biorefinery of the IRIAF 
with real MSW coming from Zaragoza facilities and the biopolymers produced 
will be introduced in real manufacturing chains of plastics within packaging and 
consumer goods, cosmet ic and agriculture sectors by the companies (e.g., 
NATRUE, LEYGATECH, BPE, etc.). Final results will be used in to develop a 
future business plan to pave further post -project advancement of the 
technology to reach the TRL-9. Addressed in WP 2-5 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 11 
 
 
Proposals should assess the feasibility of market deployment 
of the products, taking into account the issues tied to the 
legislative framework related to waste-to-product applications. 
A sound business model should be provided. In particular 
quality and cost of the products must be such to ensure market 
uptake, and in any case at least comparable with existing 
comparable products. An accompanying full cost/benefit 
analysis takes into account the savings associated with 
avoidance of disposing of waste. 
A sound business model is provided in the point 3.1.2 in order to ensure market 
uptake. An accompanying full Life Cycle Cost (LCC) analysis takes into 
account the savings associated with avoidance of disposing of waste will be 
performance at demonstration scale. LCC will be carried out on the processes 
developed for the selected bioproducts to reduce economic impact vs. 
traditional materials. The economic viability of the biorefinery will be performed 
in WP6-7 with inputs from all previous WPs. Addressed in WP6-7 
Safety, quality and purity of the products must be validated in 
order to meet commercial and/or regulatory requirements by 
actively building upon existing knowledge and standardisation 
activities. 
Monitoring and control systems integration will be identified in order to fulfil the 
requisites of final products: safety, quality and purity. The definition of the 
requisites needed to be fulfilled by the new bio -products according to the end 
user requirements and the EU legislation will be made and analysis to fulfil the 
standards are included as addressed Milestones 2.3 and 4.1 . Addressed in 
WP1 
Proposals should also include a Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) 
in order to evaluate the environmental and socio -economic 
performance of the whole value chain. 
In W P6 environmental and socio -economic assessments for the different 
product lines will be included. The results of the analysis will show that the 
costs of the bioproducts developed in URBIOFIN will be comparable with the 
existing comparable products, while providing environmental and social -
economic advantages. Addressed in WP6
1.3 Concept and approach 
1.3.1 Overall concept underpinning the project 
The biorefinery concept for OFMSW aims at maximizing the recovery of more diverse resources from MSW in addition to 
bioenergy, by simultaneous exploitation and remediation of waste. The urban biorefinery will be composed of three inter-related 
main modules where each value chain will be developed (Figure 1.3a). These modules will be demonstrated in three sites, in 
order to make use of already existing demo facilities. Additional investment will be done to these facilities to improve their efficiency 
and reach the targeted final bioproducts with the quality required for future market access. 
Module 1 will be located in Alcudia (Valencia, Spain), in the biotechnological demonstration plant of IMECAL project coordinator. 
IMECAL together with the partner CIEMAT have developed a biotechnological patented technology (European Patent EPO 
2112226, USA Patent 8399228 B2 and international PCT WIPO 099038) to produce second generation bioethanol from the 
OFMSW (PERSEO bioethanol ®). The plant has a capacity to process 25 tonnes per day of OFMSW. The necessary facilities to 
use the bioethanol produced as building block for the production of bioethylene will be constructed and integrated in IMECAL 
demonstration plant. 
Module 2 will be located in Zaragoza (Spain) and Puertollano (Ciudad Real, Spain), in the MSW Technology Innovation Center 
“Alfonso Maíllo” owned by URBASER partner and in the Biorefinery pilot plant of IRIAF. Specifically the 2 AD systems as well as 
the biogas line will be placed in Zaragoza and the downstream line for VFA valorisation to PHA will be placed in Puertollano. The 
final extraction step will be performed in Wageningen, since WR resources to perform this task, avoiding important investment 
costs to the process. 
Module 3 will be located in Zaragoza (Spain) to convert the biogas to biomethane with microalgae as well as validate its use as 
fuel for vehicles, and also its use for PHA production. Additionally in this module the biofertilisers uses will be evaluated against 
controls to verify the improved properties of these products.  
 
 
 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 12 
 
 
 
Figure 1.3a URBIOFIN modules 
Partners involved in URBIOFIN have large experience in the required technologies and materials developed in the project as well 
as both national and international recognition (Section 4). The different modules of the project have as objective to produce high 
value products from the or ganic fraction of mun icipal solid wastes, moving ahead  from the typical anaerobic  and composting 
processes. For this reason, the modules are thought to obtain high value products from 3 intermediates, bioethanol, VFA, MCFA 
and biogas.  
In the last decade bioethanol has become the largest biofuel with an estimated worldwide production of 150 billion litres in 20204. 
The rapid development of the bioethanol market has been accompanied by a growing interest in its use as a renewable building 
block for the production of bio-based chemicals5. In URBIOFIN project second generation bioethanol from OFMSW will be used 
as feedstock for the production of bioethylene, which is the raw material for the synthesis of PE (the most demanding plastic  in 
Europe, with more than 13 Mtones demanded in 2013)6. Bioethanol will be produced from OFMSW by using specially developed 
PERSEO technology, which will be adapted to convert the bioalcohol, currently employed as a liquid biofuel, to produce 
bioethylene at semi-industrial scale. The residual solid which contain the components of MSW that are not fermented to produce 
bioethanol (proteins, lipids, pectin , etc.) is nowadays being used as solid biofuel. However, in URBIOFIN this material will be 
employed as feedstock stream for downstream valorisation in the biorefinery, incorporating it to Anaerobic Digestion (AD) in order 
to valorise this fermentation feedstock into valuable bioproducts.  
The current commercially established process to biopolymers production is mainly based on fossil fuel pathway, with clear 
disadvantages regarding non-renewable source as well as environmental impact. In order to reach high PHA yields the typical 
bacterial feedstock are costly sugars, which in this project is avoided. The relatively high costs are the main reason which hinders 
biopolymers adoption in the market. The major advantage of this project lies at the reduction of costs using as substrate residual 
and renewable source non -food competing such as VFA from AD and MCFA /LCFA. It provides a very convenient option to 
decrease the production costs of biopolymers. Moreover, the biochemical pathways proposed in this project also offers a great 
advantage in terms of process flexibility, since you can use directly the VFA to produce scl -PHA for agriculture or low cost 
applications or you can apply the MCFA as substrate for accumulation PHA as mcl-PHA for high cost applications.  
The symbiotic activity between photosynthetic microorganisms (microalgae and/or cyanobacteria) and heterotrophic and 
chemoautotrophic bacterial communities in p hotobioreactors operated at high pH constitutes a low -cost and environmentally 
friendly technological platform for the simultaneous removal of CO 2, H 2S, NH 3 and VOCs from biogas . In this process, 
 
4 (OECD-FAO, 2014) http://ethanolproducer.com/articles/11264/oecd-fao-outlook-report-predicts-growth-in-ethanol-production 
5 Weusthuis, R.A., Aarts, J.M.M.J.G., Sanders, J.P.M., 2011. From biofuel to bioproduct: is bioethanol a suitable fermentation feedstock for synthesis of bulk 
chemicals? Biofuels, Bioproducts and Biorefining (5), 486–494. 
6 http://www.plastics.gl/market/plastics-the-facts-2014/  

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 13 
 
 
photosynthetic microorganisms employ the incident solar light to fix the CO 2 contained in the biogas as biomass, with the 
subsequent production of O 2. This O2 generated in-situ in the photobioreactor is used by chemoautotrophic bacteria to oxidize 
H2S and NH3 to SO42- and NO3-, respectively. The O 2 is also employed for the oxidation of VOCs to CO 2 and H2O as main end 
products. This oxygen demand for H2S, NH3 and VOCs oxidation avoids desorption of the photosynthetic oxygen present in the 
cultivation broth and therefore the contamination of the upgraded biomethan e with O 2. Further revalorization of the produced 
microalgae-bacterial biomass is possible via biofertiliser production. A final biomethane polishing step for volatile methyl siloxanes 
removal will be also implemented. The recently demonstrated ability of specific microbial communities for siloxanes 
biodegradation opens a new opportunity to biologically remove these contaminants commonly present in raw biogas in a more 
environmentally friendly and less energy-intensive way. Their low solubility requires an additional effort to overcome mass transfer 
limitations when implementing this process in conventional bioreactors, which will be addressed by innovative strategies for gas-
liquid transport intensification. Microalgae from the photo bioreactor used for biomethane upgrading can be used, once dried as 
component for solid biofertilisers formulations and/or used for extraction of its aminoacids (thanks to its high content in proteins) 
and other active molecules with agronomic properties for the formulation of l iquid biofertilisers. The production of PHAs will be 
addressed in a two-stage biological process consisting of a desulphurization step followed by a PHAs production unit. Autotrophic 
denitrification constitutes a cost-efficient biogas purification method based on the injection of NO 3- as electron acceptor for H 2S 
oxidation. This technology constitutes a potential alternative to aerobic biofiltration (as it avoids external oxygen supply and mass 
transfer limitations), and present clear advantages over their physical-chemical counterparts. Once pre -treated, the H 2S-free 
biogas will be supplemented to a high mass transfer bioreactor where type II methanotrophs able to accumulate PHAs will use 
the CH4 contained in the biogas as carbon source. The high CH4 content and the CH4/O2 ratio support biogas as an ideal substrate 
for methanotrophs growth and PHAs production. Different process and cultivating conditions will be tested in order to boost t he 
PHAs accumulation capacity.  
The trans -disciplinary areas considered  in this project are:  Chemical engineering, Biotechnology; Polymer chemistry; 
Microbiology; Mathematical modelling and sustainabil ity assessment methodologies; Green chemistry; Economics; Process 
control and monitoring and Plant engineering. 
1.3.2 Positioning of the project 
The technological developments of URBIOFIN have been positioned on the Technology Readiness Levels (TRLs) scale (Table 
1.3a). The starting point is for the most part TRL5 -6 (Technology Validated-demonstrated in industrially relevant environment). 
The starting TRL is supported by the previous experience of the partners in the processes involved and linked to a number of 
prior related projects. Technical and industrial knowledge will be exchanged among the project partners for obtai ning the 
successful integration of technologies in industrial or operational environment with the participation of end users, thereby reaching 
an overall TRL6-7 (Technology demonstrated in industrially relevant environment-system prototype demonstration in operational 
environment). For instance, the main studies related to partial AD to produce VFAs are from last 5 years7. They mainly worked at 
lab-scale and using different residues trying to optimize the process parameters to enhance acid production. Addi tionally, 
Kleerebezem et al.  8 (2015) indicated in a recent review that more work is needed to demonstrate the possibilities of PHA 
production after partial AD against traditional biogas systems for multiple substrates.  
Besides, preliminary results obtained by the UVa in the photosynthetic upgrading of biogas 9,10 together with previous studies 
described in literature shows the capacity of this system for the production of a biomethane complying with the required 
composition for natural gas grid injection or use as automotive fuel. The scale up potential of this process has been demonstrated 
at laboratory scale in a controlled environment (TRL 4). Within this activity a system prototype will be operated and optimiz ed in 
a real operation environment, demonstrating the viability of the system for final applications (TRL 7). The photosynthetic biogas 
upgrading is currently under evaluation in a 1.2 m2 open pond located outdoors at the facilities of UVA under the frame of national 
R&D project. The successful results obtained so far guarantee a successful scale up to the 273 m2 open pond targeted (TRL 7). 
The two-stage biodesulfurization-bioconversion system and the biological polishing unit for siloxane removal will be moved from 
TRL 3 and 4 to TRL 6 based on the previous know-how on industrial scale biotrickling filters for odour removal in sewage plants 
and bubble absorption columns for CO2 capture acquired by UVa in recent research contracts with the companies JSF hidráulica 
 
7 Patel, S.K.S., Kumar, P., Singh, M., Lee, J.K., Kalia, V.C., 2015. Integrative approach to produce hydrogen and polyhydroxybutyrate from biowaste using 
defined bacterial cultures. Bioresour. Technol. 176, 136–141. 
8 Kleerebezem, R., Joosse, B., Rozendal, R., & Van Loosdrecht, M. C., 2015. Anaerobic digestion without biogas? Rev. Environ. S ci. & Bio/Technol., 14(4), 
787-801. 
9 Serejo M, Posadas E, Boncz M, Blanco S, Garcia-Encina P,  Muñoz R (2015) Influence of biogas flow rate on biomass composition during the optimization 
of biogas upgrading in microalgal-bacterial processes. Env. Sci. & Technol. 49(5): 3228-3236. 
10 Toledo A.L, Serejo M, Blanco S, Perez R, Lebrero R, Muñoz R (2016) Photosynthetic biogas upgrading to bio -methane: boosting nutrient recovery via 
biomass productivity control. Algal Res. 17: 46-52. 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 14 
 
 
(http://www.cubiertaflotante.com/en/areas/control-de-olores/) and Biogas Fuel Cell S.A. ( http://biogasfuelcell.com/). The 
microbiology of biogas desulfurization and PHA accumulation has been fully understood in previous national projects and the 
advance in TRL here proposed will be therefore focused on mass transfer issues during process scale -up, where the staff from 
the Department of Chemical Engineering and Environmental Technology of UVa has a proven expertise. In addition, UVa is 
currently conducting at URBASER facilities a scale-up of the anoxic biotrickling filter up to 200 L using real biogas under the frame 
of a research contract. 
Regarding MCL-PHA production resources, WR will use existing technology to produce mcl -PHA from the organic fraction of 
municipal solid waste. For this purpose, two parallel development lines will be used; 1. Use of existing mixed cultures, as present 
and described for wastewater treatment plants,  and feed these mixed cultures with medium  or long -chain-length fatty acids 
(MCFAs and LCFAs, respectively ), separately or as produced in the anaerobic digestion process; and 2. Replace the existing 
mixed culture with a (pure) culture of Pseudomonas putida and feed this with organic waste and MCFAs/LCFAs. To achieve this, 
at least 12 man months (MM’s) have been reserved to lift this part to TRL-level 5 and higher. 
WR will also use its biorefinery/pilot-plant set-up to improve extraction yields for regular and mcl-PHA from fermentation fluid. For 
this purpose, physical breakage (bead mill) of biomass will be used in combination with enzymatic treatment to reach maximal 
yield of PHA’s. With an estimated effort of 6 men-months (MM’s) also a TRL level of 5 and higher will be reached for large scale 
PHA-extraction from fermentation fluid/microbial biomass. 
 
Table 1.3a TRL progress as a result of URBIOFIN project 
 
11 Serejo M, Posadas E, Boncz M, Blanco S, Garcia-Encina P,  Muñoz R (2015) Influence of biogas flow rate on biomass composition during the optimization 
of biogas upgrading in microalgal-bacterial processes. Env. Sci. & Technol. 49(5): 3228-3236. 
12 Toledo A.L, Serejo M, Blanco S, Perez R, Leb rero R, Muñoz R (2016) Photosynthetic biogas upgrading to bio -methane: boosting nutrient recovery via 
biomass productivity control. Algal Res. 17: 46-52. 
13 Lòpez JC, Quijano G, Pérez R, Muñoz R (2014) Assessing the influence of CH4 concentration during cultura enrichment on the biodegradation kinetics 
and population structure. J. Environ. Manage. 146: 116-123. 
14 Lebrero R, Toledo-Cervantes A.L, Muñoz R, del Nery V, Foresti E (2016) Biogas upgrading from vinasse digesters: a comparison between an anoxic 
biotrickling filter and an algal-bacterial photobioreactor. J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol. 91: 2488-2495. 
15 Accettola F, Guebitz G, Schoeftner R (2008) Siloxane removal from biogas by biofiltration: biodegradation studies, Clean Tech n Environ Policy, 10: 211 -
218 
Technology proposed Initial 
→Final 
TRL 
Justification 
Bioethanol from OFMSW as 
chemical building block 
5 →7 The bioethanol from MSW production as building block will be tested at demonstration continuous 
level, with different feedstocks, improving the techno-economical efficiency 
Ethylene from OFMSW 5 →7 Technology from GID validated at pilot scale and will be demonstrated at semi-industrial scale 
VFA from 2 phase AD 5-6 → 7 Results of 2 phase systems using MSW as substrates are only validated at pilot-scale level with 
the purpose of separate and use the VFA and in the project it will be scale up till demo level 
VFA Elongation to MCFA/LCFA 5 → 7 FA elongation to MCFA/LCFA  using Cryptococcus fermentation is established WR-technology at 
pilot-plant scale. 
SCL-PHA production 6 →7 Bibliography results indicated advances till demo level but in no relevant environments as is 
proposed here in URBIOFIN 
 
MCL-PHA production 4 →7 mcl-PHA production by Pseudomonas putida using various (agricultural) waste streams is 
established WR-technology at pilot-plant scale 
Open pond photobioreactor for 
integral biogas upgrading 
4 → 7 The technology has demonstrated satisfactory results in laboratory environment11 ,12. A system 
prototype will be operated in a relevant environment (outdoors) for system optimization 
Two-stage biological system for 
biogas revalorization by PHAs 
production  
4 → 6 Anoxic biofiltration for H2S removal and PHAs accumulation using CH4 as carbon source have 
been validated as cost-effective technologies in laboratory environment.  A system prototype will 
be tested in a relevant operational environment to demonstrate technology readiness13 ,14. 
Biological polishing unit aiming at 
removing volatile methyl siloxanes 
from biogas 
3 → 6 Laboratory studies have demonstrated the capacity of certain microbial communities to efficiently 
biodegrade volatile methyl siloxanes. This microbial ability will be implemented into high-mass 
transfer bioreactors to validate the application of this biotechnology in real environments15 . 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 15 
 
 
 
1.3.3 National or international research and innovation activities linked with the project 
URBIOFIN relates to and builds on the results of a number of successful national and European R&D projects where partners 
have previously participated or are currently participating (Table 1.3b). An extensive data base search has been carried out and 
the r esults indicated that there is no project or patent that hinders the technical developments and innovation objectives of 
URBIOFIN project. 
Table 1.3b Partners’ projects with synergy to URBIOFIN 
Project Scope End 
Year Partner 
2G BIOPIC.  Second Generation BIoethanol sustainable production 
based on Organosolv Process at atmospherIc Conditions 
H2020-LCE-2014-2 Demonstrating 
advanced biofuel technologies 2018 - 
KACELLE. Demonstrating Industrial Scale Second Generation 
Bioethanol Production - KAlundborg CELLulosic Ethanol plant 
FP7-ENERGY-2008-TREN-1 
ENERGY.2008.3.2.2 - Bioethanol 
production from lignocellulosics 
2013 - 
OLI-PHA A novel and efficient method for the production of PHA 
polymer-based packaging from olive oil waste water FP7-NMP 2015 VISUM 
BIOVALCH4: Biogas conversion to commodities and high -added value 
products: exploring new strategies for biogas valorization 
RETOS – Spanish Ministry of 
Economy and Competitiveness 2018 UVA 
SMART GREEN GAS:  Smart Green Gas: Energy valorization of solid 
waste and effluents 
CIEN program – Spanish Ministry of 
Economy and Competitiveness 2017 UVA 
Nutrient recovery from agro-industrial effluents via microalgae biomass 
growth and valorisation of microalgae bioproducts 
Spanish Ministry of Economy and 
Competitiveness 2018 UVA 
PERSEO: Ethanol production from domestic organic solid waste Spain level project 2012 IMECAL 
REFERTIL: Reducing mineral fertilisers and chemicals use in agriculture 
by recycling treated organic waste as compost and bio-char products 
FPVII. Grant Agreement 289785. 
KBBE.2011.1.2-02 2015 BPE 
TL BIOFER:  Nutrients and regenerated water recycling in WWTPS 
through twin-layer microalgae culture for biofertilisers production. LIFE 13 ENV/ES/000800 2017 BPE 
BIOFORSU: Valorisation of the organic fraction of municipal solid waste 
by conversion to bioethanol and combustible biomass Spain level project 2013 IMECAL 
SLUDGE4ENERGY: Maximization of energy obtaining from sludge 
through synergy process of oxidation and digestion Innpacto 2012-2014 2014 AINIA 
PHBOTTLE: New sustainable, functionalized and competitive PHB 
material based in fruit by -products getting advanced solutions for 
packaging and non-packaging applications 
FP7/2007-2013/280831 2016 AINIA 
WHEYPACK: Reduction of CO 2 emissions by the PHB use obtained 
from whey: demonstration in dairy products packaging LIFE 13 ENV/ES/000608 2016 AINIA  
DIGESMART: Follow new process to minimize spreading digestate flows 
and to economically valorise the minerals (nitrogen, phosphorus and 
potassium, among others) 
Co-funded by the Eco -innovation 
Initiative of the European Union 
ECO/12/332882 
2016 AINIA  
BIOCORE: Biorefinery of lignocellulose from agricultural waste FP7/2008-2014/241566 2014 WR 
CLAMBER: Biorefinery to treat agro - and non agroindustrial  wastes: 
process development and plant design and construction, as well as 
economical and environmental analysis 
Spanish project  co-funded with 
FEDER funds 2014 
IRIAF 
AINIA 
BPE 
SeaBioPlas: Bioplastics from Seaweed FP7/2012-2015/606032 2015 WR 
MSWBH: Conversion of Municipal Solid Waste to Biofuels using 
anaerobic ABE fermentation Horizon 2020/2016-2020 2018 WR 
Splash: Production of medium -chain and long -chain fatty acids from 
algae FP7/2012-2017/311958 2017 WR 
Small scale PHA Biorefinery: PHA production and application from 
agricultural rest streams and waste water TKI-AF 2015 (Dutch Project) 2017 WR 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 16 
 
 
3R2020+: It would help to know the maximum VFAs production and the 
individual VFAs obtained using the organic fraction of municipal solid 
waste as carbon source. 
CIEN 2014 
(SPANISH Project) 2019 
URBASER, 
AINIA 
 
In addition, some partners have patents of their ownership related to the URBIOFIN project: 
- Bahr M., Muñoz R., Domínguez A., Díaz M., Díaz J.I. (2012) System of simultaneous depuration of biogas and waste industrial 
streams by microalgae and bacteria. Patent 2 372 509. 
- Weusthuis R.A., van der Oost J., Eggink G. (2014) Genetically engineered microorganisms for production of fatty acids. Patent 
WO 2014016328 
- Method for Recovering Energy from the Organic Fraction of Solid Urban Waste and Associated Facility (2010). Spanish patent 
nº 2303792, European Patent EPO 2112226, USA Patent 8399228 B2 and international PCT WIPO099038 
- Reactor and process for dehydration of ethanol to ethylene (2014). Patent US20150265992 A1 
1.3.4 Overall approach and methodologhy 
Starting at TRL-4 or 5 as discussed in the previous Section 1.3.2. Positioning of the project, the overall approach and methodology 
of URBIOFIN project is aimed to an advancement from TRL-5 to TRL-7. To reach such an end, the set of the project’s activities 
are categorised as shown in Figure 1.3a, and as further described in the points following. 
Modules for demo-scale process and integration: 
- Module 1 includes a demonstration plant for the conversion of OFMSW into second generation bioethanol using PERSEO 
Bioethanol® technology patented by IMECAL and CIEMAT partners. This technological approach is based on an enzymatic 
process with a moderate pre -treatment developed for OFMSW as raw material, which avoids the presence of inhibitors to the 
fermentation process. PERSEO Bioethanol® demonstration plant in Alcudia is equipped with all the reactors, fermenters, and 
separation and distillation units needed for t ransforming the OFMSW to bioethanol. After that, the produced bioethanol will be 
converted to Ethylene by an ‘Ethanol to Ethylene’ (EtoE) demonstration plant. For the catalytic conversion of bioethanol into  
bioethylene a new module will be incorporated downstream in L’Alcudia demo plant. The bioethylene production unit will be a 
modular demonstration unit which contains all necessary equipment to achieve a high yield and proper quality of ethylene. The  
engineering study for the integration of these new modules into the existing bioethanol production facilities will be performed by 
CSIC and adapted to the demonstration capacities of PERSEO bioethanol plant. Finally the bioethylene produced will be validated 
as ripening agent in post harvest fruit cambers (WP5). 
- Module 2 will be design and construct as an integrated demo-scale plant for the valorisation of the organic fraction of municipal 
solid wastes (OFMSW) to high -value products, such as mcl -PHA and chemical buildin g blocks as biogas. The demonstration 
plant at the R&D Center of URBASER in Zaragoza will include two-phase AD unit of 100 and 40 m3 respectively, aimed to obtain 
volatile fatty acids (VFAs) in the first stage and also biogas as chemical building block for module 3. The bioethanol produced in 
module 1 will be also used for elongation of VFA to medium or long chain fatty acids (MCFA and LCFA respectively) and the use 
of the MCFA/LCFA as carbon-source for PHA accumulation as medium chain length polyhydroxyalcanoates (mcl-PHA products). 
A scale-up from lab to 100L fermenters will be performed using Cryptococcus and similar other yeasts in the process. As a result, 
effluent coming from t he hydrolytic reactor will be sent to Puertollano at IRIAF pilot plant where the demo plant for microbial 
elongation will be operated with real effluent by IRIAF partner under the supervision of WR in order to optimize the process and 
trying to reach a hig h conversion of VFA conversion to MCFA /LCFA. This MCFA can be used as final product for cosmetic 
application and also as substrate for mcl -PHA production in the next task. IRIAF, Ainia and WR will validate and operate the 
demo-scale plant for scl and mcl-PHA production that will be also placed in Puertollano to operate in batch mode. This will consist 
of two reactors (from 0.3 to 20 m3) In the particular case of scl-PHA production, both reactors will be required, so as one will be 
used for mixed-culture biomass production and the other one for scl-PHA accumulation. Both reactors in such case will operate 
with the VFA-rich effluent of the hydrolytic reactor of Task 3. 1, and biomass of the first reactor will be transferred to the second 
one to maximize scl -PHA accumulation. In the particular case of mcl -PHA production with pure culture (using Pseudomonas 
putida), one reactor will be used, using  the VFA-rich effluent and ethanol/LCFA to accumulate MCL-PHA. The reactor in which 
PHA production will take place, should be operated under stress conditions (temperature, oxygen and nutrients) to maximize the 
PHA accumulation.  Finally, a comprehensive data analysis will be performed in order to evaluate and define the best parameters 
for the whole value chain to scl -PHA and mcl-PHA production at demo-scale level. PHA coming from the latter process will be 
extracted from biomass by a combination of mechanical treatment (Bead Mill) and enzymatic treatment (protease, lysozyme, 
SDS/EDTA). This will be done in WR installations in collaboration with IRIAF and NATURE PLAST. The use of the extracted mcl-
PHA for cosmetic bioplastics production and MCFA as cosmetic component will be evaluated by NATRUE as end user. The use 
of the extracted scl-PHA will be evaluated by LEYGATECH as end user for agricultural bioplastics. 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 17 
 
 
- Module 3 will comprise a combination of different strategies for the revalorization of the raw biogas obtained as a by -product 
from MSW anaerobic digestion. First, the operation of a symbiotic microalgae -bacteria process implemented in a 273 m2 high 
rate algal pond photobioreactor interconnected to an external absorption unit that will be constructed and operated at the R& D 
Center of URBASER in Zaragoza as a platform technology for integral upgrading of biogas in a single process to produce a high-
quality biomethane. In addition to this, a novel biological technology for the removal of volatile methyl siloxanes will be developed 
to be implemented as a refining stage in integral biogas upgrading systems. In one hand, the concentrated algal biomass will be 
hydrolyzed to convert protein into free amino acids. The performance of chemical and enzymatic hydrolysis will be tested and 
optimized in a 10-20 L reactor to obtain an optimal conversion efficiency of protein to amino acids. On the other hand, the digestate 
from the second stage and the residual biomass from the later PHA process of module 2 will be valorised using a Spouted Bed 
Dryer Technology (SPBD technology) to obtain dry granules as solid fertilizer. Produced aminoacids as a compound for liq uid 
fertilizers and the solid f ertilizer will be evaluated by BPE  as end user. Another valorisation approach will be based on the 
intensification of PHAs production from the CH4 contained in the biogas. After an initial biogas pretreatment for H 2S removal via 
anoxic biofiltration, the cultivation conditions of PHA-accumulating methanotrophs and the CH4 mass transport from the biogas to 
the liquid phase will be optimized to boost the production of the target bio -products. Two 10 m3 bioreactors will be operated for 
the anoxic removal of H 2S from biogas and the subsequent bioconversion of CH 4 into added value biopolymers (PHAs) using a 
high mass transfer unit.  
The three modules described above will be integrated in one whole process which includes the three product lines. The integration 
process in WP5 is aimed to prove the scaling -up and the technical (and later econom ic) feasibility of the URBIOFIN concept in 
order to progress for a future commercialisation of the process. The outcomes will be used for the en vironmental and economic 
assessment of the project. 
1.3.5 Sex and gender analysis 
The technologies, processes and materials developed in URBIOFIN are gender -independent. All URBIOFIN Partners have 
internal gender equality jobs creation and promotion policies. The consortium will foster the presence of women in the technical 
and management teams and decision board implemented to govern URBIOFIN project. The coordinator of URBIOFIN is Ms. Coll. 
Project aims to contribute to these objectives for enhancing Gender Equ ality by involving numerous female researchers (see 
section 4) in the project and by promoting women researchers to play a leading role in work packages . Actually, WP1  (Ms. 
Leticia Regueiro), WP2 (Ms. Caterina Coll), WP3 (Ms. Cristina Álvarez), WP5 (Ms. Natalia Herrero), WP6 (Ms. Sara Tena) 
and WP8 (Ms. Caterina Coll) are managed by female researchers, and as it is described in section 4, near to 50% of the staff 
researchers involved in the project are women. 
The Treaty on European Union, the European policy establishes equal opportunities between women and men. In par ticular 
articles 2 and 3 establish equality between women and men as a specific task of the Community and also to promote equality. 
Monitoring the progress toward gender equality in science has become a well-established activity of the European Union research 
policy. In accordance with these principles, the approach of URBIOFIN is fully in line with Directive 2002/73/EC of the European 
Parliament and of the Council of 23 September 2002 on the implementation of the principle of equal treatment for men and women 
as regards access to employment, vocational training and promotion, and working conditions.
1.4 Ambition 
1.4.1 Advance of the project beyond the state-of-the art 
Below are described the ambitious advances brought by URBIOFIN development starting with a short summary of current state-
of-the-art and the proposed developments in the project. 
State of the art in the bioethanol production from the OFMSW 
The conventional fermentation process is a commercial success in the conversion of edible biomass (mainly sugar in Brazil and 
starch in the USA) to first generation bioethanol. However, due to the competition with food and concerns about ecological 
systems, recent research has shifted towards bioethanol production from non-food biomass feedstocks (lignocellullosic materials 
from agricultural, industrial and urban wastes), which are low cost and abundantly available sources. The growing market for 
bioethanol as a biofuel has also been accompanied by an increasingly interest as a useful platform molecule for the productio n 
of value-added chemicals (some examples are: ethylene, propylene, 1,3-butadiene, acetaldehyde, diethyl ether, ethylene oxide, 
n-butanol, acetic acid and ethyl acetate)16.  
 
16 Weusthuis, R.A., Aarts, J.M.M.J.G., Sanders, J.P.M., 2011. From biofuel to bioproduct: is bioethanol a suitable fermentation feedstock for synthesis of 
bulk chemicals? Biofuels, Bioproducts and Biorefining (5), 486–494 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 18 
 
 
Second generation bioethanol from OFMSW can be produced by thermochemical and biochemical methods17. In thermal process, 
bioethanol is produced via gasification of the feedstock at a high pressure and further catalytic conversion of the syngas in to 
bioethanol. In the biochemical pathway, the substrate is firstly pre -treated in order to make the cellulosic component accessible 
to the cellulases for the subsequent enzymatic saccharification step. Sugars -mainly glucose- are released after the enzymatic 
hydrolysis and are then fermented to produce bioethanol. The processes usually employed in the fermentation of hydrolysate are 
simultaneous saccharification and fermentation (SSF) and separate hydrolysis and fermentation (SHF). Conventionally, the SHF 
process has been employed but SSF is superior for ethanol production since it can improve et hanol yields by removing end 
product inhibition and eliminate the need for separate reactors, which is also cost effective18. 
Today, there are several technologies for the conversion of OFMSW into second generation bioethanol, all of them at 
demonstration scale. Some of these processes have been developed by Bluefire, Coskata, New Planet Energy or Fulcrum. 19 In 
these projects not only OFMSW is used as feedstock, but also agroindustrial wastes, where it is pre-treated by severe and costly 
thermochemical processes. PERSEO Bioethanol®, patented by IMECAL and CIEMAT partners (European Patent EPO 2112226, 
USA Patent 8399228 B2 and international PCT WIPO 099038) is developed and specialized exclusively to the bioconversion of 
OFMSW, and it is based on an enzymatic process with a moderate pre-treatment, which avoids the presence of inhibitors to the 
fermentation process. PERSEO Bioethanol® demonstration plant is equipped with all the reactors, ferm enters, and separation 
and distillation units needed for transforming the OFMSW to bioethanol. The typical ethanol yields obtained vary from 100 – 130 
L of bioethanol per tonne of organic waste in dry bases. The bioethanol production involves several steps:  
A. The raw material is subjected to a pre -treatment which aims to eliminate the inerts contained in the organic matter (stones, 
plastics, metals, glass, etc.).  
B. A thermochemical dilute acid hydrolysis of the raw material is done in order to produce a solubilizing of the cellulose and 
hemicellulose contained in the MSW.  
C. After the feedstock is hydrolysed, a SSF process is done. The cellulose saccharification and fermentation of glucose to ethanol 
is produced in the same fermenter, adding the enzymes, yeast and nutrients suitable for efficient conversion of sugars to ethanol.  
D. The fermentation sludge obtained is subjected to a distillation process in order to concentrate the ethanol produced in the 
fermentation of the OFMSW.  
E. Dehydration process is carried out of the mixture by passing through a molecular sieve to achieve dehydration required for 
ethanol (> 99.5%) as a final product.  
The main challenges of the biochemical route concern the integration of the system which requires a coordinated effort in 
improving each step to achieve an overall high efficiency and a decreased production cost of bioethanol. The improvement of 
OFMSW pretreatment processes and the introduction of the latest biotechnological advances to decrease the operational costs 
(specifically those focused on the development on new generation of tailor made enzyme cocktails, which are able to effectively 
depolymerize cellulose and starch) have allowed to reduce considerably the price of MSW bioethanol produced. 
 
Figure 1.4a Pictures from the PERSEO Bioethanol® Technology plant 
Advances brought by URBIOFIN Few technologies for effectively converting municipal solid waste residues to fermentable sugars 
have been developed, from technical and economical point of view. URBIOFIN will use PERSEO Bioethanol® technology to 
produce bioethanol from MSW to be used as chemical building block, in order to improve the operation process costs through the 
use of most cost -effective pretreatments, and tailor made enzyme cocktails supplied by NOVOZYMES partner for the specific 
process. New generation of enzyme cocktails will be used in URBIOFIN demonstration activities. These new enzymes cocktails, 
targeting for OFMSW, increase the amount of liberated fermentable sugars and, as a consequence, the final bioethanol yield, 
which improves the process economy. Moreover the bioetha nol produced from the OFMSW will be employed as a chemical 
building block for the production of bioethylene, which is a higher added value application than the current use as biofuel, adapting 
 
17 Progress in bioethanol processing. Balat M, Balat H and Oz C. Progress in Energy and Combustion Science, 2008, 34, 551-573. 
18 Bioethanol production from agricultural wastes: An overview. N Sarkar, SK Ghosh, S Bannerjee, K Aikat. Renewable Energy, 2012, 37,19-27. 
19 www.bluefireethanol.com, www.coskata.com, www.newplanetenergy.com, www.fulcrum-bioenergy.com  

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 19 
 
 
the process to this new application. The minimum purity of the bioethanol required to produce bioethylene (95%) is lower than 
when it is used as biofuel (99.5%), which will reduce considerably the operational costs of the plant (molecular sieve drying  unit 
avoided). 
State of the art in the use of bioethanol as building block for the production of bioethylene  
The rapid development of the bioethanol market in the last decade has been accompanied by a growing interest in its use as 
renewable feedstock for the manufacture of bio -based chemicals20. Moreover, bioethanol was recently identified as one of the 
potential top bio-based raw materials for the chemical industry21. Important technological advances have also been made in the 
catalytic conversion of bioethanol (e.g. dehydrogenation, reforming, dehydratation, oxidation, etc.) and many significant chemicals 
have been successfully synthesized: ethylene, propylene, diethyl ether, 1,3-butadiene, acetaldehyde, ethyl acetate, etc22. Given 
the large number of options for bioethanol conversion Posada and coworkers 23 identified the most promising derivatives from a 
sustainability point of view (covering economic, environmental and health and safety aspects), being ethylene one of the most 
favourable compounds. The authors identified the most promising bioethanol derivatives by com paring the bioethanol -based 
conversion routes to its respective petrochemical counterparts.  
Nowadays, most of the global production of ethylene comes from the petrochemical industry by steam cracking of naphta. 
However, the catalytic conversion of bioetha nol to ethylene is a mature technology with molar yields reaching above 99% 24.    
There are many industrial examples, most of them in Asia with capacities varying from 40 KTA to 300 KTA. Most of these plants 
producing bioethylene use first generation bioethanol as feedstock (corn, starch, sugarcane). Since 2010 the Brazilian company 
Braskem commercializes “I'm greenTM Polyethylene”, a bioPE produced from ethanol sugarcane, having an annual production 
capacity of 200,000 tonnes25. In 2016, Technip have announced the acquisition of Hummingbird® technology from BP Chemicals 
Limited, a technology, which uses a wide range of ethanol feedstocks and can easily be integrated into existing ethylene facilities. 
The advanced catalyst simplifies the processing scheme and significantly increases selectivity. 
(http://www.technip.com/en/press/technip-completes-acquisition-hummingbird%C2%AE-technology-bp-chemicals-limited) 
Beyond the state of the art in URBIOFIN project bioethylene will be produced at demonstration scale from the catalytic conversion 
of second generation bioethanol coming from OFMSW. This bioethylene w ill be used as a ripening gas in post -harvest fruit 
chambers. Moreover, it could also be polymerized to produce a more sustainable and economically competitive bio-polyethylene 
compared to commercial bio-PE from sugarcane.  
State of the art in the production of VFA from anaerobic digestion of OFMSW 
The objective of the partial anaerobic digestion (AD), i.e two-phase AD, consist into induce the VFA accumulation, separating the 
hydrolytic phase from the methanogenic step which has been validated for multiple wastes, such as municipal solid waste26. To 
promote this biological VFAs production, maximizing the product concentration, but also controlling the product spectrum (type of 
individual VFAs produced) several parameters should be taken into account (i.e. hydraulic retention time, pH, temperature, etc.). 
The main drawback of this technology, even optimized to produce high VFAs concentrations, is that the VFAs mixture has no 
clear economical value. The specific VFAs have to be purified from the liquid effluent to be commercialized as pure acids. However 
the purification methods, such as precipitation, distillation or electrodialysis imply high cost in the process.  
 
20 Weusthuis, R.A., Aarts, J.M.M.J.G., Sanders, J.P.M., 2011. From biofuel to bioproduct: is bioethanol a suitable fermentation feedstock for synthesis of bulk 
chemicals? Biofuels, Bioproducts and Biorefining (5), 486–494. 
21 Bozell, J.J., Petersen, G.R., 2010. Technology development for the production of biobased products from biorefinery carbohydrates –the US Department of 
Energy’s ‘‘Top 10’’ revisited. Green Chemistry 12, 539–554. 
22 Sun,J and Wang, Y,. Recent advances in catalytic conversion of ethanol to chemicals. ACS Catalysis. 2014, 4, 1078−1090 
23 J Posada , A. D. Patel, A Roes, K Blok, A. Faaij, MK. Patel. Potential of bioethanol as a chemical building block for biorefi neries: Preliminary sustainability 
assessment of 12 bioethanol-based products. Bioresource Technology 135 (2013)490–499 
24 Bi, J., Guo, X., Liu, M., Wang, X., 2010. High effective dehydration of bio -ethanol into ethylene over nanoscale HZSM-5 zeolite catalysts. Catalysis Today 
149, 143– 147. 
25 http://www.braskem.com/site.aspx/Im-greenTM-Polyethylene 
26 Bolzonella, D., Fatone, F., Pavan, P., Cecchi, F., 2005.  Anaerobic fermentation of organic municipal solid wastes for the production of soluble organic 
compounds, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 44, 3412–3418 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 20 
 
 
 
Figure 1.4b Pictures from the URBASER center 
To surpass this economic issue in the URBIOFIN project the effluent from partial AD will be used directly as nutrient and carbon 
source for biological processes requiring minimum purification steps for medium -chain fatty acids (MCFA) production. The 
economical potential of novel routes producing higher added value products will enhance the development of this type of systems 
for several organic substrates.  Additionally these partial AD process produces a solid stream that contains different levels of non-
VFA organic matter as well as that can be perfectly applied to further biogas production in the methanogenic step.  
The advances proposed in URBIOFIN beyond the state of the art are focused in the use of VFA as chemical building block 
avoiding expensive process for its purification, looking at least for concentrations around 20 g/L in the hydrolytic efflue nt to be 
further processed.  
 
State of the art in the production of PHA biopolymer from VFA 
Medium- and long- chain fatty acids are more valuable than short -chain fatty acids (SCFA, e.g., acetic, propionic, butyric acid) 
from an economical point of view. SCFAs are major products in the first stage of anaerobic fermentation, and only feeding ethanol 
to this effluent, MCFA /LCFA formation is enhanced through chain elongation. Anaerobic microorganisms, such as Clostridium 
kluyveri which are already present in the anaerobic fermentors leading to VFA are known to elongate short-chain acids to primarily 
C6 and C8 by combining them with ethanol. In order to maximize MCFA/LCFA production, major parameters affecting the process 
are ethanol concentration and temperature. For production of even longer MCFA’s, such as C10 – C18 a separate fermentation 
using dedicated microorganisms such as Cryptococcus is proposed. By applying specific fermentation conditions and specific 
variants of this yeast, different product ranges for MCFA’s can be achieved such as C8-C12 or C14-C18. Another advantages of 
the elongation process in this project is related to the use of residual bio-ethanol coming from OFMSW undergoing a hydrolysis 
and fermentation step combined, known as simultaneous sacharification and fermentation (SSF), previously explai ned. This 
residual stream might be directly used for chain elongation, avoiding additional cost due to reagents purchase. The main 
disadvantage of the elongation process is the lower MCFA/LCFA production rates. For this reason in this project the objective will 
be used a reactor configuration with biomass retention to favour the enrichment of MCFA/LCFA producers and avoids the longer 
start-up, despite the additional cost of the carrier material27. The different MCFAs will also be used as a substrate to 
polyhydroxyalcanoates (PHA) producing microorganisms. Normally the short VFA are used as direct feeding for PHA 
accumulating bacteria, however in this the mixed PHA -producing culture and a pure culture of Pseudomonas putida will be fed 
with the MCFA’s/LCFAs generated in the elongation process. However medium-chain PHAs (mcl-PHA) appear to be much more 
elastomeric and resistant, and they possess attractive properties such as low melting points, high elasticity, and biodegradability, 
respect to scl-PHA, offering higher value applications28,29. 
 
27 Grootscholten, T. I. M., dal Borgo, F. K., Hamelers, H. V. M., & Buisman, C. J. N. (2013). Promoting chain elongation in mixed culture acidification reactors 
by addition of ethanol. Biomass and Bioenergy, 48, 10-16 
28 Kabilan S, Ayyasamy M, Jayavel S, Paramasamy G (2012) Pseudmonas sp. as a source of medium chain length polyhydroxyalkanoates for controlled drug 
delivery: perspective. Int J Microbiol 
29 Samrot AV, Avinesh RB, Sukeetha SD, Senthilkumar P. Accumulation of p oly[(R)-3-hydroxyalkanoates] in Enterobacter cloacae SU-1 during growth with 
two different carbon sources in batch culture. Appl Biochem Biotechnol.2011;163:195–203. 

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 21 
 
 
 
Figure 1.4c Pictures from IRIAF biorefinery center 
The advances proposed in URBIOFIN beyond the state of the art are the use of residual stream for the first AD reactor to produce 
high added value products, such as scl-PHA, mcl-PHA, with good properties respect to typical PHA produced with sugar or other 
expensive substrates. The objective will be produced around 100 g per day, increasing the percentage accumulated from typical 
30% at least till 50-70%. 
 
State of the art in biogas upgrading by microalgae photobioreactor 
Biogas is the byproduct from anaerobi c digestion with highest valorization potential, with an expected production in Europe in 
2030 of 20 billion Nm 3/year according to the Biogas European Association. Due to its high CH 4 content, biogas constitutes a 
suitable raw material for the production, via upgrading, of a biofuel similar to natural gas: biomethane. Nonetheless, biogas 
relatively high production cost, the lack of tax incentives and the inherent presence of pollutants such as CO 2, H2S, NH3, VOCs 
and volatile methyl siloxanes, have limited the use of biomethane for injection in natural gas grids or as automotive fuel. In this 
sense, the high production, upgrading, compression and distribution costs results in biomethane prices ~0.6 € Nm-3, considerably 
higher than those of natural gas (~0.4 € Nm-3) 30,31. It is therefore clear that a reduction in the cost of biogas upgrading based on 
technological advances will increase the competitiveness of this bioresource. Current scenario for biogas upgrading is mainly  
based on stand-alone physical-chemical technologies capable of removing either CO 2 or H2S. CO2 abatement is performed by 
highly energy-intensive technologies (0.25-0.3 kWh Nm-3) which entail high inversion costs (1,500 -6,000 € (Nm 3/h)-1), such as 
chemical scrubbers, pressure s wing adsorption or cryogenic separation 32. Similarly, physical -chemical technologies for H 2S 
removal involve prohibitively high operating costs and an excessive carbon footprint33. New developing biotechnologies for biogas 
upgrading, although more cost -efficient and environmentally friendly than their physical -chemical counterparts, still present 
important drawbacks which limit their full -scale implementation. For instance, CO 2 archaeal bioconversion by H 2 injection in 
digesters presents limited applicabili ty while posing explosion risks, and H 2S biological oxidation by air or O 2 injection entails 
operational problems related with elemental sulphur accumulation or biomethane contamination  with O 234. Thus, despite the 
promising resource recovery potential of biogas, there is no available technology in the market (either physical -chemical or 
biological) able to simultaneously remove CO2, H2S, NH3, VOCs and siloxanes from biogas in an efficient, economically feasible 
and environmentally sustainable way, and capable of producing in a single stage a biomethane with enough quality for its injection 
in the natural gas grid or its use as automotive fuel 35. One of the proposed technologies for biogas revalorization relies on the 
symbiotic activity of algae and bacteria  in photobioreactors, which can support the simultaneous removal of CO 2 and H2S in a 
single process36. Other biogas contaminants, such as NH 3 or VOCs, will be also likely oxidized in the process. This innovative 
process has been successfully implemented in UVA laboratory in open photobioreactors interconnected to an external absorption 
column to promote CO2 and H2S gas-liquid mass transfer from the raw biogas to the cultivation media (Figure 1.4d). Preliminary 
 
30 Thrän D, Billig E, Persson T, Svensson M, Daniel -Gromke J, Ponitka J, Seiffert M, et al. (2014) Biomethane – status and factors affecting market 
development and trade. IEA Task 40 and Task 37 Joint Study. http://www.bioenergytrade.org/downloads/t40-t37-biomethane-2014.pdf 
31 Vestman J, Liljemark S, Svensson M (2013) Cost benchmarking of the production and distribution of biomethane/CNG in Sweden. 
http://www.sgc.se/ckfinder/userfiles/files/SGC296_v2.pdf 
32 Muñoz R, Meier L, Diaz I, Jeison D (2015) A critical review on the state -of-the-art of physical/chemical and biological technologies for an integral bio gas 
upgrading. Rev. Environ. Sci. & Bio/Technol. 14: 727-759. 
33  Abatzoglou N, Boivin S (2009) A review of biogas purification processes. Biofuels Bioprod. Bioref. 3:42–71. 
34 Lebrero R, Toledo -Cervantes A.L, Muñoz R, del Nery V, Foresti E (2016) Biogas upg rading from vinasse digesters: a comparison between an anoxic 
biotrickling filter and an algal-bacterial photobioreactor. J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol. 91: 2488-2495  
35 Bauer F, Hulteberg C, Persson T, Tamm D (2013) Biogas upgrading – Review of commercial technologies. SGC Rapport 
2013:270. SGC. http://vav.griffel.net/filer/C_SGC2013-270.pdf 
36 Bahr M, Díaz I, Dominguez A, González Sánchez A, Muñoz R (2014) Microalgal-biotechnology as a platform for an integral biogas upgrading and nutrient 
removal from anaerobic effluents. Environ. Sci. Technol. 48:573-581. 

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 22 
 
 
results achieved CO2 and H2S removals over 95% and 100% respectively, and further optimization of the operating parameters 
resulted in a biomethane composition complying with most European legislations37,38. This system thus presents a high potential 
for scale-up, offering a promising upgrading capacity together with low energy consumption and environmental impacts.  
The presence of volatile methyl siloxanes  (VMS) has also consistently limited the energy use of biogas due to their detrimental 
effect on the equipment and piping of the process. Current physical-chemical processes for VMS abatement (such as adsorption, 
absorption or condensation) entail prohibitiv e investment and operating costs 39. The development of low -cost biological 
alternatives able to efficiently remove VMS by combining high -mass transfer units together with highly efficient microorganisms 
will be also addressed in this project. A novel final  polishing stage to be implemented after the upgrading process will be thus 
obtained. Revalorization of biogas via bioconversion into PHAs (biocompatible and biodegradable biopolymers) constitutes 
another attractive alternative due to their high market value (1.5 – 5 € kg-1PHA). In this sense, H2S-free biogas obtained via anoxic 
biofiltration, is an ideal substrate for cultivating type II methanotrophs able to accumulate PHAs as a result of its high CH4 content, 
the high ratio CH4/O2 and the low cost associated to this raw material. Previous literature studies and the experience of the UVA 
research group on PHAs production from diluted CH4 emissions support the potential of this valorization strategy40. This process 
will be implemented in high mass transfer bioreactors, able to remove the H2S present in the biogas by NO3- injection and further 
convert the CH4 into PHAs. 
 
 
Figure 1.4d Photobioreactor configuration for integral biogas upgrading 
Beyond the state of the art, URBIOFIN will validate two technological platforms for raw biogas revalorization at demonstratio n 
scale. Biomethane will be produced at a sufficient quality to be use d as vehicle fuel by photosynthetic upgrading of the waste 
biogas in a prototype photobioreactor. Siloxanes contained in the biogas will be removed in a final polishing step to ensure a high 
grade, competitive biomethane. The biogas will be also used as raw material to produce PHAs, a high added value product, in a 
two-stage bioreactor prototype.    
State of the art in the production of bio-fertilisers from microalgae and OFMSW 
Biofertilisers and Biostimulants  could be defined as “Probiotics” for plants: Products bringing out benefits from interactions 
between microorganisms – plants – environment. They are newly produced and are n ot regulated in all the EU member states . 
The new (revised ) Fertiliser regulation that is in course foresees an EU harmonised frame for Biofertilisers and Biostimulants . 
“Roadmap for the Revision of the Fertilisers Regulation (EC) No 2003/2003” indicates that “..., both producing industries and 
Member States are interested in extending  the scope of Regulation (EC) 2003/2003 to also cover organic fertilisers, organo -
mineral fertilisers, soil improvers, growing media, agronomic fertiliser additives and possibly plant biostimulants to achiev e full 
harmonisation of the legislation for the entire sector....”.  
Regarding the Regulatory frame for biofertilisers in Europe  the situation is confusing an there is no reference in the available 
revised Fertiliser Regulation draft of the inclusion of products with living microorganisms under the chapt er of Biostimulants. Lot 
 
37 Serejo M, Posadas E, Boncz M, Blanco S, Garcia-Encina P, Muñoz R (2015) Influence of biogas flow rate on biomass composition during the optimization 
of biogas upgrading in microalgal-bacterial processes. Env. Sci. & Technol. 49(5): 3228-3236. 
38  Toledo A.L, Serejo M, Blanco S, Perez R, Lebrero R, Muñoz R (2016) Photosynthetic biogas upgrading to bio-methane: boosting nutrient recovery via 
biomass productivity control. Algal Res. 17: 46-52 
39 Accettola F, Guebitz G, Schoeftner R (2008) Siloxane removal from biogas by biofiltration: biodegradation studies, Clean Techn Environ Policy, 10: 211-
218 
40 Lòpez JC, Quijano G, Pérez R, Muñoz R (2014) Assessing the influence of CH4 concentration during cultura enrichment on the biodegradation kinetics 
and population structure. J. Environ. Manage. 146: 116-123. 
 
 
 
Microalgae 
recycling
Upgraded 
biogas
Raw 
biogas
Nutrient 
solution HRAP Sedimentation 
tank
Absorption 
column
ADSORBER
BIOGAS
NUTRIENTS SETTLER
CULTIVATION 
MEDIA RECYCLING
HRAP
BIOMETHANE
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 23 
 
 
of work and efforts must be done in the next years to not let loose the resources and markets that are being developed by 
European companies in the EU territory and worldwide. 
The important aspects to take into account for fertiliser are: 
- Classification of biofertilisers according its primary agronomical effects  
- Ingredients of a biofertiliser 
- How to formulate biofertilisers?: depend on the objective and the application conditions 
• Solid state 
• Liquid state (for fertirrigation, nebulisation, etc) 
- Compost, soil improvers and growing media and the biofertilisers 
Different scientific works and field trials previously performed by the members of the consortium have indicated the interest  of 
combining rich C substrates like compost (biologically rich) or biochar (biologically inert material) together and with selected 
microorganisms strains or its cocktails fo r great biostimulant, fortifier and/or plant protection effects. One problem to be solved 
when combining biofertilisers or microorganisms with compost, soil improvers and growing media (and digestate and biochar) is 
the competition and interactions of selected strains and the natural populations in the organic substrate. Other problems could be 
the substrate possible toxicity and adequacy of the nutrient profile, and also excess temperatures in the substrate (over 35ºC ) 
can cause survival or functionality problems. 
The advances proposed in URBIOFIN beyond the state of the art are to produce specif ic solid biofertiliser combining the solid 
fraction from the second anaerobic digestion with specific co-substrates as well as liquid biofertiliser with high aminoacids content 
coming from microalgae hydrolysis to be applied in mixtures with several microorganisms or additives to make competing products 
in the market with high added value that will be validated against controls to verify good properties.  
1.4.2 Products and services available in the market and innovation potential 
The main competitors of the technologies and products developed in URBIOFIN are indicated in Table 1.4a. In the table, it is 
also indicated the main limitations of the current commercial solutions as well as the market advantages that the project will 
provide. 
Table 1.4a Main competitors of technologies and products developed in URBIOFIN and proposed progress  
Technology/product Main competitors Current limitations URBIOFIN advantages 
Bioethanol from MSW as 
chemical building block 
First and Second 
generation 
bioethanol 
producers: BlueFire, 
Coskata, Fulcrum 
and Enerkem 
 
Most bioethanol comes from 
first generation sources 
(corn, starch, sugarcane).  
Second generation 
bioethanol is  
usually used as biofuel 
Second generation bioethanol from OFMSW used 
as chemical building block 
Ethylene from OFMSW 
derived bioethanol   
-Shell 
-Scientific Design 
First generation bioethanol 
as feedstock  
Second generation bioethanol from OFMSW used 
-Less Diluent steam use 
-Better Ethanol to Ethylene Catalyst 
-Higher Ethylene Product quality 
-Minimize the formation of CO2/CO 
SCL-PHA production ‐ Sugar-PHA 
production 
‐ High cost of sugar 
substrates 
‐ Competitiveness with 
food 
‐ Cheap substrate for PHA 
production 
‐ Similar yields to more expensive 
substrates due to parameters 
optimization 
MCL-PHA production ‐ Other uses of C10 
and C12 as 
antimicrobial 
‐ Social issues regarding 
the use of MCFA coming 
from wastes 
‐ Uses for cosmetic packaging 
applications with lower social 
impact. 
Biogas upgrading (CO 2 
removal) by physical -
chemical technologies 
‐ Chemical 
scrubbing 
‐ PSA adsorption 
‐ Cryogenic 
separation 
‐ Limited to CO2 removal 
‐ High investment costs 
‐ Energy intensive 
‐ Negative environmental 
impacts 
‐ Integral biogas upgrading 
‐ Cost-efficiency 
‐ Low energy consumption 
‐ Environmental friendliness 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 24 
 
 
Biogas upgrading (H 2S 
removal) by physical -
chemical technologies 
‐ Activated carbon 
adsorption 
‐ Limited to H2S removal 
‐ High operating costs 
‐ High carbon footprint 
‐ Negative environmental 
impacts 
‐ Integral biogas upgrading 
‐ Cost-efficiency 
‐ Low carbon footprint: biomass revalorization 
Biogas upgrading (CO 2 or 
H2S removal) by biological 
technologies 
‐ H2 injection in 
anaerobic 
digesters 
‐ Aerobic/anoxic 
biofiltration 
‐ Limited to removal of a 
single contaminant 
‐ Only validated at 
laboratory scale 
- Operational limitations 
‐ Integral biogas upgrading 
‐ Validated in relevant environment 
‐ Biomethane composition complying with 
European legislation 
2. Impact
2.1 Expected impacts  
2.1.1 Contribution to the expected impacts set out in the Work Plan 
In Table 2.1a it is described how URBIOFIN will contribute to the expected impacts set out in the BBI annual Work Plan, under 
the BBI 2016.D6 topic. 
Table 2.1a Contribution of URBIOFIN to the expected impacts of the BBI 2016.D6 topic 
Expected impacts Contributions of URBIOFIN 
Demonstration of higher added -value production than 
current valorisation of the organic fraction of MSW 
(biogas and/or compost). 
OMSW will be converted into chemical building blocks (bioethanol, short and 
medium VFAs and biomethane), biopolymers (SCL-PHA, MCL-PHA) or additives 
(bio-ethylene, microalgae derived biochemicals such as aminoacids). In addition, 
biomethane and dry organ ic-mineral granules (solid biofertilisers) will be also 
generated, in order to valorise the whole OMSW content.  
Achieved competitive price of the developed products. The price of the developed products will be 0.6 € kg-1 bioethanol, 4-7 € kg-1 PHA 
(or even biocomposites with higher value) , 1.8€/kg bioethylene, 4 € L-1 
microalgae based fertilisers , and 0.25 € kg-1 solid fertilisers . The bio based 
products developed in URBIOFIN will have comparable costs with existing 
comparable products (Table 2.1b). 
A sound business model is provided in order to ensure market uptake. An 
accompanying full Life Cycle Cost (LCC) analysis will take int o account the 
savings associated with avoidance of disposing of waste. It is important to 
emphasize that the low price of same intermediate compounds e.g., bioethanol 
will be composed with the high price of the final products such as ethylene, i.e., 
mainly intermediates could present higher prices compared to traditional fossil 
fuels products. However, the final product has a higher market price due to its 
characteristics that makes the entire biorefinery a cost-effective process. 
Safety, quality and purity of the (new) products are in 
line with EU legislation and proven to meet end-market 
requirements in order to facilitate future market access 
and commercialisation. 
The bioproducts obtained by URBIOFIN processes will be evaluated and certified 
that they pass performance and quality assurance tests and meet qualification 
and safety criteria stipulated in EU legislations as well as international standards 
and market regulations. Specific tasks on this topic will be carried out in each WP 
dedicated to the development of bio-based products. 
Contribution to the BBI JU Key Performance Indicators 
(KPI), specifically:  
Realisation of at least 1 new cross -sectorial 
interconnection in bio-based economy clusters (KPI 1), 
at least 1 new bio-based value chains (KPI 2), at least 
1 new cooperation project through cross -industry 
clusters (KPI 3), at least 2 new bio -based materials 
(KPI 5), and at least 1 consumer product based on the 
obtained bio-based chemicals and materials (KPI 6). 
URBIOFIN will be realized:  
• 2 new cross-sectorial interconnection in based economy cluster (KPI 1) i.e., 
Materials (bioplastics)  <> Horticulture (bioplastic PHA used in agricultural 
applications),  
Chemicals (biobased ethylene) <> AgroFood (fruit ripening gas). 
• 2 new bio-based value chains (KPI 2) i.e.,  
Municipality>Biorefinery (URBIOFIN) <> BioPlastic (PHA) <> Agriculture (PHA-
plastics),  
Municipality <> Biorefinery (URBIOFIN) <> Fertilizer <> Agriculture 
• 1 new cooperation project through cross -industry cluster  (KPI 3) i.e., 
Bioplastic company (materials), Horticulture company (horticulture), Ethylene and 
fertiliser companies (chemicals) and Fruit company (agrofood). 
• 2 new bio-based materials (KPI 5) i.e., PHA plastics and bags. 
• 1 consumer product (KPI 6) i.e., PHA bags for households. 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 25 
 
 
2.1.2 Improvement of innovation capacity and integration of new knowledge 
URBIOFIN will demonstrate at semi-industrial scale the OFMSW valorisation for the production of higher value and marketable 
products rather than conventional MSW processing (incineration for energy recovery o composting). The valorisation of OFMSW 
as a sustainable raw material creates an important competitiveness opportunity for the European bioeconomy and will increase 
the innovation capacity of our industry. It is expected that the industrial biotechnology market sector in Europe almost double by 
2050, compared to 2013 values, reaching up to 50 billion € 41. Bioethanol, bio based plastics and aminoacids (all of them target 
bioproducts obtained in U RBIOFIN proposed biorefinery) are expected to be the top three products with higher growth (Figure 
2.1a). In EU28 2013, the chemicals and plastics sector represented a turnover of 48 billion € and 160,000 jobs42. Initiatives such 
as URBIOFIN will enable in dustrial innovation in many different sectors to convert OFMSW as a raw material to produce bio 
based products with countless final applications. Our approach will significantly contribute to the bio -based industries ambitious 
target aiming to replace 30 % of the oil based chemical and materials in Europe by 203043, while at the same time helping to solve 
a great societal and environmental problem which is the MSW management.  
 
Figure 2.1a Industrial biotechnology market in Europe44 
The strong industrial composition of URBIOFIN consortium (7 SMEs and 2 large companies) together with research institutions 
(2 universities, 3 RTOs) and 2 clusters will enhance the innovative potential of the project. Industrial partners are integrated into 
the project decision making structure to ensure that the involved industrial sectors drive project activities and benefit from the 
project results. URBIOFIN will validate the whole value chain with the direct participation of waste management authorities a nd 
end-users of the developed bioproducts , which will guarantee high impact and effective dissemination and exploitation of the 
results. High economic impact will be achieved through strengthening the competitiveness of the industrial partners in the target 
market sectors and related ones by: 1) promoting the use of URBIOFIN products, components and systems in high value-added 
applications while keeping costs competitive, 2) strengthening and differentiating the EU Industry, 3) increasing workers’ sk ills. 
Detailed information of the market for each developed bioproducts in URBIOFIN (bioethanol, MCFAs, biomethane, as building 
blocks and bioethylene, PHA, biocomposites, solid and liquid biofertilisers as final products) is presented in the following pages. 
Bioethanol: Main current use of bioethanol is as transport biofuel or fuel additive for gasoline. Bioethanol has also been used in 
the beverage industry and as renewable chemical building block for the production of ethylene, propylene, diethyl ether, 1,3 -
butadiene, acetaldehyde, ethyl acetate, etc. 45 (Figure 2.1b). Global bioethanol market volume was 100 billion litres in 2014 46. 
However, it is expected a bioethanol production of 150 billion litres in 2020 47, which means an increase of 50% compared to 
current market volumes. Currently bioethanol is produced from edible biomass, mainly from sugar in Brazil and starch in USA 
(Figure 2.1c). However, due to the competition with food and concerns about ecological systems, recent research has shifted 
towards bioethanol production from non-food biomass feedstocks (lignocellullosic materials from agricultural, industrial and urban 
wastes), which are low cost and abundantly available sources. Second generation lignocellulosic ethanol is near 
commercialisation, with first-of-a-kind commercial plants built or currently under construction. 
 
 
41 http://www.industrialbiotech-europe.eu/ 
42 http://biconsortium.eu/sites/biconsortium.eu/files/news-image/16-03-02-Bioeconomy-in-figures.pdf 
43 www.bbi-europe.eu (bbi-ju-2016-call-for-proposals-brochure) 
44 http://www.industrialbiotech-europe.eu/ 
45 Sun,J and Wang, Y,. Recent advances in catalytic conversion of ethanol to chemicals. ACS Catalysis. 2014, 4, 1078−1090 
46 http://www.e4tech.com/project/from-the-sugar-platform-to-biofuels-and-biochemical/ 
47 (OECD-FAO, 2014) http://ethanolproducer.com/articles/11264/oecd-fao-outlook-report-predicts-growth-in-ethanol-production 

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 26 
 
 
 
Figure 2.1b Worldwide production and use of ethanol48 
 
Figure 2.1c Production of bioethanol per country or region in 201349 
MCVFAs Medium-chain fatty acids with carbon chain lengths varying from 8 to 14 have a broad range of applications as lubricants, 
creams, soaps, antimicrobials, and edible oils. They are not constituents of fossil fuels and relative complicated chemical 
processes are needed to make them from longer-chain fatty acids. 
Caprylic acid is widely used in the cosmetic, food and feed industry for its antimicrobial activity. Decanoic acid is applied  in the 
chemical industry for its lubrication properties, but also in the cosmetic industry as lubricant but also becau se of its flavour 
properties. Lauric acid, as sodium salt, is soap and as such is applied in most detergents, soaps and other cleansing agents used 
in the Home & Personal Care and Cosmetic industry. It is also more-and-more applied as antimicrobial ingredient in Food & Feed 
Industry. Myristic acid is mostly applied in the Cosmetic Industry. The total fatty acid market size is expected to hit 12,000 M€ in 
2017, about 40% of this market in the personal care (detergent, soap, cosmetics) sector. The current market size for caprylic acid 
is approximately 2.5 M€. The market size for decanoic acid is approximately 50 M€, for lauric acid approximately 2 ,000 M€ and 
for myristic acid approximately 600 M€. The fatty acid market size is expected to double in the next 5-6 years in both the cosmetic 
and food applications. 
Biomethane: Biogas obtained as a by-product from the anaerobic treatment of OMSW represents a renewable energy source 
based on its high CH 4 content. The actual European network of ~14 ,000 anaerobic digesters is expected to increase within the 
next years in order to supply up to 18-20 million Nm3 in 2030 according to the latest European Biogas Association’s estimations. 
In this context, the development of new biotechnologies for biogas revalorization via its upgrading to biomethane will contri bute 
to the EU objective of developing a new European bio-economy less dependent on fossil fuels and based on the use of biological 
raw materials and bio-processing methods. For instance, one of the main direct uses of biomethane is as automotive fuel, which 
can be applied with a similar compositional standard as pipeline natural gas. A very rough estimation of current biomethane use 
worldwide for automotive purposes is 2 -3 TWh/a, which is expected to rapidly increase up to 6 TWh/a according to recent 
evaluations. However, and despite the interest and potential competitiveness of biomethane for fuel production, important limiting 
factors such as low economic efficiency or the low acceptance of the actual feedstock still challenge biomethane future prospects. 
URBIOFIN will develop a novel alternative to increase the competitiveness of biomethane against other fossil fuels as natural gas 
or diesel. First of all, the use of biogas from the digestion of OMSW ensures the sustainability of the feedstock used for biomethane 
production. Moreover, the upgrading system based on a biological pho tosynthetic process will significantly reduce the actual 
market price of biomethane. In this sense, biomethane actual cost amounts to ~0.6 € Nm-3, significantly higher than that of natural 
gas (about 0.4 € Nm-3), being the upgrading process one of the main contributors (~25-30%) to the total cost. Finally, the use of 
 
48 Angelici, C.; Weckhuysen, B. M.; Bruijnincx, P. C. A.; ChemSusChem 2013, 6, 1595. 
49 http://ethanolrfa.org/pages/World-Fuel-Ethanol-Production  

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 27 
 
 
biomethane to replace natural gas can lead to a significant reduction of greenhouse gases (GHG) emissions, achieving savings 
of over 80% when compared to fossil fuel alternatives. This will also contribute to the ambitious international commitments of the 
EU regarding reduction in GHG emissions together with the new goals of producing a clean energy. In summary,  the 
supplementation of a suitable feedstock for biogas production and the upgrading and conditioning to biomethane are key hotspots 
that will be addressed by URBIOFIN to ensure the economic and environmental sustainability of the final biomethane.  
Bioethylene: Ethylene is primarily a monomer used as a feedstock in the manufacture of polymer plastics (PE, PET, PEG, PVC 
and PS), fibers and other organic chemicals that are ultimately consumed in the packaging, transportation and construction 
industries and in a multitude of industrial and consumer markets. Total worldwide production of ethylene was 127 million tons in 
2014, being one of the most consumed chemicals50. Polyethylene (PE), the largest ethylene derivative market, accounted for over 
60% of global ethylene consumption in 201451. During 2009–2014, world ethylene consumption grew at an average rate of almost 
4.5% per year, while capacity increased at a slower rate of about 3.5%. Ethylene consumption is expected to grow at about 4% 
per year over the next five years. Capacity additions will match this growth52. 
PHA: The high value of the PHA is based not only in the bioBased production process itself, but also in its biodegradable nature, 
as seen in following picture (Figure 1). Biobased polymers such as PHA are generally more sustainable materials than their 
petrochemical-based counterparts, and, as previously mentioned, they can be produced from a wide range of renewable 
resources. The actual market segments of PHA consist in flexible packaging and mulch films (used in blends), and some niche 
markets in consumer goods (cosmetic packagings, horticulture pots, biodegradable cutlery, etc.). The most representative PHAs 
are polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB) and poly hydroxyvalerate (PHV) and its copolymer (PHBV), with physical properties similar to 
polyethylene and polypropylene. In both markets, besides its physical properties, PHA provides biodegradability. This is 
particularly adapted to these markets where the product shelf-life is low. In particular in the case of mulch films, a major advantage 
arises in this case in addition to having the advantages of a traditional plastic film: after use there is no need of collecting the film. 
In 2014, the global production capacities of bioplastics amounted to 1.7 million tons.  
 
Figure 2.1d Production of PHA in 2014. 
This translates to approximately 680,000 hectares of land. The key players in the PHA market are Biomatera, Biomer, Bio -On 
SROL, Kaneka corporation, Meredian Ins., Metabolix Inc, Newlight Technologies, LIC, PHA industrial S.A., Polyferm Canada Inc., 
Shenzhen Ecomann Biotech Co Ltd, Tianan Biologic Materials Co and Tianiin Greenbio Materials Co Ltd. PHA could be used in 
various applications, but the targeted markets in the project are flexible packaging, consumer goods and agriculture/horticulture. 
The actual potential market size can then be estimated at around 80 ,000 tons: 35 ,000 tonnes in flexible packagings (partial 
 
50 http://www.e4tech.com/project/from-the-sugar-platform-to-biofuels-and-biochemical/ 
51 https://www.ihs.com/products/ethylene-chemical-economics-handbook.html 
52 https://www.ihs.com/products/ethylene-chemical-economics-handbook.html 

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 28 
 
 
substitution of PLA and PLA blends, starch blends and other biodegradable), 35 ,000 tons in agriculture/horticultu re (partial 
substitution of starch-blends) and 10,000 tons in consumer goods. Due to their properties, scl-and mcl- PHA should in particular 
be a good substitute to PBAT, a fossil-based biopolymer currently used for improving softness and processability of starch-based 
and PLA-based blends. PBAT has today a global production capacity of around 80,000 tons per year. The growth rate from 2014 
to 2019 expected can be seen in Figure 2.1e. It is expected a growth in PHA market from 32 to 104 Mton, mainly related to flexible 
or rigid packaging and agriculture purposes.  
 
Figure 2.1e Market of bioplastic in 2014 and evolution from 2014 till 2019 
Biocomposites: Composite materials as used e.g. in the construction, automotive and chemical industries, combine attributes 
from two of more different materials in one combined application. Examples are the combination of (bio)plastics with natural 
materials/fibers coming from wood, wheat or starch. The composite materials are forming a rapidly growing market with a market 
value for WPC alone of 4000 M € per year. The total packaging market in Europe is approximately 130 billion €. Over 50% of this 
market is biobased (paper, board, wood) and 31% is plastic. The major plastic packaging material is PE-based (56%) for mostly 
films, wraps, and bags but also some bottles and containers (HD-PE) and smaller amounts of PP (19%), PET (11%), PS (10%) 
and PVC (4%) are used. For packaging, very few composite materials are currently available. However the possibilities are 
extremely high since composites potentially can com bine the favourable attributes of various compounds, e.g. the light weight 
and strength of plastic with the abundant availability and flexibility of paper and board.    
Fertilisers: Segment of solid biofertilisers is more competitive with traditional mineral and organic-mineral fertilisers, with greater 
size but lower value added. Regarding liquid biofertilisers, microalgae grown on AD liquid and gaseous streams will be used a s 
protein source for aminoacids product ion via hydrolysis, to be used as main component of liquid biofertilisers. Regarding liquid 
biofertilisers in general and based in aminoacids and peptids in particular, are a fast growing but smaller market but with much 
higher value added products, design ated typically for ferti rrigation and fruit and vegetables intensive crops. The Market of 
biofertiliser in 2014 can be seen in picture 2.1f. The increasing awareness regarding health and wellness, the growing organic 
food industry, and the significant increase in the price of chemicals have played a huge role in providing the necessary boost to 
the global biofertilizers industry. Global Biofertilizers Market is expected to reach USD 1.88 Billion by 2020 at a CAGR of 14.0% 
from 2015 to 2020. The phosphate -solubilizing segment is the fastest -growing market in the biofertilizers industry across the 
globe. 
The market was dominated by North America in 2014 and accounted for the largest share in the total biofertilisers market. Asia-
Pacific is projected to be the fastest-growing market for between 2015 and 2020 due to the increasing prices of chemical fertilizers 
and increasing food demand due to population growth. In terms of type, the nitrogen fixing biofertilisers seg ment is projected to 
be the largest market for biofertilisers; whereas in terms of crop -type, cereals & grains is projected to be the largest market for 
biofertilisers in 2014 (Figure 2.1g). The cyanobacteria segment is projected to be the largest market f or biofertilisers by 2020 in 
terms of microorganisms. Furthermore, by application, seed treatment is projected to be the largest market for biofertilisers  in 
between 2015 and 2020. The biofertilisers market is characterized by intense competition due to the presence of a large number 
of both large and small -scale firms. Expansions, acquisitions, agreements and new product launches are the key strategies 
adopted by market players to ensure their growth in the market.  
 

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 29 
 
 
 
Figure 2.1f Market of biofertiliser in 2014 
 
Figure 2.1g Biofertilisers global market size by types  
Table 2.1b summarizes the potential economic impact of the bio-based products developed in URBIOFIN, by showing indicative 
current prices, global market volumes and sales for each of them, as well as the expected prices. Expected prices are estimated 
based on the corresponding business cases (Addendum 1). The savings associated with avoidance of disposing of waste (MSW 
management disposal fees) are also a key aspect which has been taken into account in the cost/benefit analysis. 
Table 2.1b Potential economic impacts of URBIOFIN bioproducts 
URBIOFIN bio-
based product Current price (€ t-1) Market volume 
(ktpa) 
Current sales 
(m€ y-1) Expected price (€ t-1) 
Bioethanol 600-700 76,700 46,000-53,600 700 
Biomethane 1.4 (0.6 € m-3) 340 Mtoe* 153,000** 1.1 (0.45 € m-3) 
Bioethylene 900-1800 127,000 114,300-228,600 1800 
PHA 2000-10000 32 Mton year-1 50-60,000 4000-7000 
Biofertilisers 200 and 6000 for solids 
and liquid respectively - 1.88 M€ year-1 250 for solid and 5000 for liquid fertilisers 
Biocomposites 500-5000 10 Mton year-1 6-8000 M€ year-1 500-2000 for pulp/PHA combinations and 
2000-10000 for PHA-based composites 
 
Proposed business plan and models to future commercialization 
The business plan for URBIOFIN technology for the next 20 years after the project end is described in detail in section 3.1.2. 
The business model for the URBIO FIN Biorefinery is based on the technology commercialisation of URBIOFIN plants. The 
following table shows the economical data of the expected benefits by URBIOFIN partners due to the commercialisation of the 
technology (20 years projected). Estimates have been done with a medium plant capacity of 50,000 ton OFMSW per year, which 
correspond to an average city of 1,000,000 habitants. 

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 30 
 
 
Table 2.1c URBIOFIN PLANT COST till 2040 
 
It is expected that once the first biorefinery is installed the technology sales increase. In any case, it is worth to consid er we are 
addressing an extremely large industry (hundred billion €) so the data shown in the table can be considered moderate.  Personnel 
plan has been estimated using revenues per employee as a metric 53 (every 305,170 € increase in turnover will require the 
recruitment of one new employee). 
Additional market research will be carried out in WP7 to assess and quantify the needs of the market: existing competitors, target 
markets, customers’ profiles, etc. This analysis will confirm and validate market opportunities and exploitation routes.  
2.1.3 Other environmental and socially important impacts 
From a LCA perspective, the project concept provides a very promising way to reduce the emissions of greenhouse gases (CO2) 
in terms of kg CO2 abated per kg of OFMSW treated to Bioethanol, Ethylene, biopolymers and additives, compared to other fossil-
fuel-based alternatives. The exact amount of th e reduction of the overall GWP will be calculated as part of the LCA that will be 
carried out based on the results provided by the project, but there are several items indicating a positive balance in terms of kg 
CO2 abated per kg of OFMSW treated: 
1. The project entails the production of new biobased products from OFMSW which can be considered alternative to similar fossil-
fuels-based products. For example, the project proposes the production of high value microalgae amino acids on the base of N 
and CO2 directly recovered from OFMSW, which is an alternative to the high carbon foot print protein crops using of synthesis 
fertilizers, 
2. The CO2 generated during the biopolymers degradation is carbon neutral in contrast to equivalent fossil-fuel-based polymers, 
3. The exhausted CO2 from biofuel combustion is carbon neutral,  
4. The system entails the production of renewable power sources such as the biogas, 
5. The low energy intensity of this type of process compared to conventional management systems based on AD, composting 
and incineration technologies. Mixed culture PHA from industrial waste water has been shown to have a lower GWP than HDPE, 
assuming a high concentration or COD 54. The results from Kendall 55 (for PHA from waste) show a lower non-renewable energy 
use than petrochemical plastics. 
6. Finally, as the extraction of PHA will be carried out using non -toxic dissolvent (alkaline-acid solutions, green dissolvent), the 
conventional recovery operation (normally based on thermal distillation techniques) is not required.  
In addition to environmental importance, it is necessary consider social importance of the project. European waste management 
sector currently employs around 1 million people (source PSIRU) and the anaerobic digestion sector employs over 70,000 people 
according to EBA (European Biogas Association) but there is still a wide potential for a lot more employment growth through 
adequate treatment of organic fraction of MSW in order to obtain chemical building blocks, b iopolymers and additives by 
implementing the proposed new bio-based value chains.  
Regarding direct job creation, highly qualified staff specialized in obtaining the new products will be necessary to carried out the 
proposed activities. Moreover, the URBIOFIN demonstration activities are expected to create 18 highly qualified direct jobs among 
the project partners during the project. After that, the future development of the project concept will allow transforming millions of 
tonnes of organic municipal waste into valuable products. Different companies from several countries will be necessary to carry 
out the transformation from the obtained chemical building blocks or polymers to new bio -based products. As a result, not only 
operators or process biological experts but also sales personal will be required to manage the output of the mentioned building 
blocks and raw materials in an international market. After the project, the new bio -based value chains and business will 
require the recruitment of 15 -20 new te chnicians in the involved companies to manage the production of the bio -based 
products and their future commercialization. 
 
53 http://theglobal5000.com/using-revenue-per-employee-as-a-metric/   
54 Gurieff N., Lant P. 2007. Comparative life cycle assessment and financial analysis of mixed culture polyhydroxyalkanoate production. Bioresource 
Technology, 8 (17), 3393–3403. 
55 Kendall A. 2012. A life cycle assessment of biopolymer production from material recovery facility residuals. Resources, Conse rvation and Recycling, 61; 
69–74. 
2022 2023 2024 2025 2030 2035 2040
(TRL9) Market
Personnel Plan 11 11 23 115 172 229
URBioFIN Plants sales 1 1 2 10 15 20
Turnover (M€) 14 14 28 140 210 280
Benefits (M€) 3,5 3,5 7 35 52,5 70
URBioFIN Plant cost: 14 M€ all modules for a OFMSW treatment plant of 50.000 t/y
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 31 
 
 
There is also a huge potential to create new indirect jobs related to the growth of new markets for these new biobased products, 
their future commercialization and product distribution within the involved bio-based economy clusters and final user industries of 
the European circular economy. 
Moreover, the project will contribute to the adoption of new models for OFMSW management since it  provides a competitive 
conversion of mentioned wastes to bioproducts. Therefore, it is aligned with the EU Bioeconomy Strategy which addresses the 
production of renewable biological resources and their conversion into vital products and bio-energy. It will contribute not only in 
scaling up of new technologies and processes for the bioeconomy but also in developing markets and competitiveness in 
bioeconomy sectors.  
The processes involved in the project will be interconnected so that a versatile and efficient biorefinery for OFMSW will be 
demonstrated. Bio-based industries involving research and innovation focused on the sustainable use of organic waste 
for the produc tion of bio -based products would be boosted thanks to the development of the proposed concept and 
thus making possible an improvement of the competitiveness in European Bioeconomy sector as well as to diversify in 
current models of biorefineries in EU Member states. 
By using the biorefinery concept applied to OFMSW (urban biorefinery), organic waste will be further exploited as feedstock which 
currently is not wide and properly valorised along EU. The development of biotechnological processes included in th e project 
such us anaerobic digestion or bioethanol fermentation, among others, are a vital part of the European bio-economy tapping into 
organic municipal solid waste to produce high value added products. In particular, it will be taken into account its h eterogeneity 
and variable composition, to produce different valuable marketable products. Then, required logistics and supply chain for a 
cascading-in-value/-in-time56 use of the waste streams would be developed along the project and it will contribute to the shift 
towards a resource -efficient, low-carbon economy to achieve sustainable growth (resource -efficient Europe flagship initiative, 
Europe Strategy 2020).   
Municipalities and companies dealing with organic waste management, in addition to their fees for treating this material, can 
increase their revenue by producing chemical building blocks, biopolymers, additives and/or fertilisers. Helping at the same time 
to fulfil the requirements of Waste Framework Directive which urges to member states by 2020 to take the necessary measures 
to achieve the targets of re-use and recycling of domestic waste and move towards a European recycling society with a high level 
of resource efficiency. Thus, reducing the organic materials that currently are sent to landfills  and, consequently, not converted 
into valuable products.  
Additionally as it is stated by European Biogas Association, anaerobic digestion is an important pillar of the European circu lar 
economy: it mitigates GHG emissions, recycles nutrients in the form of organic fertilisers, prevents nitrogen leakage into 
groundwater and avoids the spread of harmful diseases through landfilling.  
2.1.4 Barriers to achieve the expected impacts 
Table 2.1d describes the possible barriers which may hinder to achieve the expected impacts of URBIOFIN and the proposed 
mitigation actions to overcome these obstacles. 
Table 2.1d Identified main barriers of URBIOFIN impacts and measures to mitigate them 
Type Barrier Mitigation measures 
Technological Higher downstream process costs than expected 
Lower quality/performance of bioproducts in comparison 
with petrochemical ones 
A risk and contingency plan has been outlined and 
risk monitoring strategies have been implemented in 
the work plan (WP8). 
Market Small market size for developed bioproducts 
 
Poor market acceptance 
 
 
The different products proposed have huge potential 
demand and gr owing industrial interest (B usiness 
cases in A ddendum 1, Sect ion 4). Dissemination 
and communication activities will be performed to all 
stakeholder highlighting the compliance with 
regulation and the sustainability advantages of 
bioproducts compared to current market products 
Legislation and 
Standards 
Potential risks associated with bioproducts regarding 
health, safety, environmental legislation 
Need to comply the current standards 
URBIOFIN will review the legislation and standards  
applicable to the proposed technologies and 
bioproducts to ensure full compliance 
 
The following table summarizes the typical causes of failure for new products in the market that should be taking into account for 
risk management and mitigation.   
 
56 Source concept « cascading-in-value and cascading-in-time» (maximize value added and resource efficiency): 
http://www.bioenergytrade.org/downloads/t40-cascading-2016.pdf 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 32 
 
 
 
Figure 2.1h Identified main caused for new product failure
2.2 Measures to maximise impact 
This section reveals other important issues for the exploitation and dissemination, such as the data management and knowledge 
strategy. 
2.2.1 Dissemination and exploitation of results  
Table 2.2a Participation of partners in international events and publications in technical journals.  
Partner Fairs, conferences and seminars Publications in technical journals 
IMECAL 
Conference style events, businesses, etc., will be performed 
to demonstrate and promote the outcomes achieved by 
URBIOFIN: IFAT, BioSpain 
Two publications in the field of waste treatment 
and scientific open access journal 
URBASER 
Conference style events, businesses, etc., will be performed 
to demonstrate and promote the outcomes achieved by this 
project. 
Urbaser will carry out data dissemination by participating in 
national/international meetings plus those monographic 
forums with special interest. 
The results will be yearly presented in both international and 
national congresses in the field of waste management. 
Partial and final results considered of interest 
will be published in ISI journals, preferentially 
within the Q1, to communicate and transfer the 
information about the project in more 
specialized media. 
BPE 
Presentations with the progress results with biofertilisers 
developments will be made at ESPP-European Sustainable 
Phosphorus Platform conferences, ORBIT conferences and 
other biofertilisers specialty conferences. 
 
IRIS EUROPACT 2017  
AINIA 
Presentation in conferences of the project data to promote it 
such as: 
- IWA AD CONFERENCE DELFT 2019 
Publications in Q1 journals such as Bioresource 
Technology in the AD field 
UVA 
The results will be presented in international and national 
conferences in the field of waste management and bioenergy. 
A Technical Workshop will be organized to present the main 
progresses to investigators and companies of the field. 
Results not subject to intellectual protection will 
be published in high impact (Q1) journals. At 
least 1 publication per year is expected. 
IRIAF-
GEACAM 
Conference style events, businesses, etc., will be performed 
to demonstrate and promote the outcomes achieved by 
URBIOFIN: BioSpain 
Results not subject to intellectual protection will 
be published in high impact (Q1) journals. At 
least 1 publication is expected. 
WR 
Presentation of the project data in conferences such as: 
- EFFOST 2017, 2018, 2019 
- WCIB (World Congress on Biotechnology) 2017, 2018, 2019 
- SBFC (Symposium on Biotechnology for Fuels and 
Chemicals) 2017, 2018,2019 
Various publications in high impact journals 
such as Applied Environmental Microbiology, 
Nature Biotechnology, etc 
CSIC Presentation of the project in conferences or trade fairs such 
as: 
Results not subject to intellectual protection will 
be published in high impact (Q1) journals (Open 

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 33 
 
 
EUROPACAT 2019, EUROPACAT 2021 
ISGC 2020, ISGC 2021 
17th International Congress in Catalysis (2020) 
EXPOQUIMIA 2020 
ACHEMA 2021 
Access). At least 1 publication per year is 
expected. 
Table  2.2b URBIOFIN exploitable results 
URBIOFIN Exploitable results Partner interested in 
exploitation 
WP 
Bioethanol production from OFMSW as chemical building block IMECAL/CIEMAT 2 
Bioethylene production from bioethanol from OFMSW IMECAL/CSIC 2 
Improving the VFA production in anaerobic treatment plants and improving the quality of 
digestate produced 
URBASER 3 
Maximize production of biogas in anaerobic treatment plants by applying an innovative 
new solution / technology (Valorga® technology). 
URBASER 3 
Efficient production of new strategic and added value market materials coming from 
organic matter residues. 
URBASER 3 
Data mining tools and models IRIS 2 
Sensors and system for process control IRIS 2 
Process for scl-PHA from VFA URBASER/IRIAF/AINIA 4 
Process for tailor-made MCFA’s (C8 – C22) from MSW WR/IRIAF 4 
Process for mcl-PHA’s using MCFA’s from MSW WR/IRIAF 4 
Biobased composite materials based on scl- and mcl-PHA WR/NATRUE 5 
New developed liquid and solid biofertilisers BPE 5 
Engineering of the integrated URBIOFIN process AINIA 6 
2.2.2 Intellectual Property, knowledge management and protection  
Table 2.2c URBIOFIN knowledge protection, licensing and sales strategy 
 
Partner Products/technologies to be developed Patents or other  IPR 
protection 
IPR licencing and sales 
strategy. Customers 
IMECAL/ 
CIEMAT 
Improvement of PERSEO Bioethanol 
pilot plant operational costs and 
adaptation for bioethanol production 
from OFMSW as chemical building 
block 
Patent or IPR protection of 
the process 
Turnkey projects or licencing 
the technology to MSW 
companies or to and 
engineering company. 
-MSW management 
companies. 
-Bioethanol as building 
block for chemical 
companies. 
 
IMECAL/ 
CSIC 
Bioethylene production from bioethanol 
from OFMSW Patent 
Turnkey projects or licencing 
the technology to MSW 
companies or to and 
engineering company 
-Chemical companies 
-Agricultural companies 
-Polymers companies 
 
URBASER 
Innovative new process to improve VFA 
production, in OFMSW treatment plants, 
involving the application of anaerobic 
plants for VFA production. 
 
Experience and know-how in 
anaerobic digestion facilities 
for OFMSW treatment at 
industrial scale based on 
exploitation Valorga 
technology. 
European waste 
management organisations 
through licensing, Waste 
management sector, 
Agricultural sector 
URBASER/ 
AINIA 
VFA conversion to PHA using mix 
culture systems 
Patent or IPR protection of 
the process 
Licensing application or 
selling agreements - Bioplastic companies 
UVA 
Algal-bacterial photobioreactor fed with 
OMSW digestate and biogas for 
biomethane production 
Patent Licensing application or 
selling agreements 
OMSW management 
companies 
UVA High-mass transfer bioreactor for PHAs 
production from OMSW from biogas Patent Licensing application or 
selling agreements 
OMSW management 
companies 
UVA High-mass transfer bioreactor for 
siloxanes removal from OMSW biogas Patent Licensing application or 
selling agreements 
OMSW management 
companies 
URBASER Innovative new process to improve 
biogas production, in OFMSW treatment  
Experience and know-how in 
anaerobic digestion facilities 
for OFMSW treatment at 
European waste 
management organisations 
through licensing, Waste 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 34 
 
 
plants, involving the application of 
anaerobic plants for biogas production. 
industrial scale based on 
exploitation Valorga 
technology. 
management sector, 
Agricultural sector 
AINIA Hydrolysis of microalgae Patent or IPR protection of 
the process 
Licensing application or 
selling agreements - Biofertiliser companies 
BPE Development of solid and liquid 
biofertilisers 
Agricultural Product official 
register Selling agreements Farmers, Agricultural 
companies 
AINIA Know-how in process engineering and 
modelling for the described process Trade Secret Consultancy services All industrial partners 
involved in the project 
IRIS Data mining tools and models Patent or utility model Licensing application or 
selling agreements  
NOVO New knowledge on enzymatic 
treatment of MSW 
Patents will be filed on 
novel 
discoveries/inventions 
Enzyme and enzyme 
application IP belongs to 
NOVO. 
 
IRIS Sensors and system for process control Patent or utility model Licensing production or 
selling agreements  
2.2.3 Communication activities 
Table 2.2d URBIOFIN communication plan. 
Channel Audience Impact When Evaluation 
Website All stakeholders Awareness and promotion of the 
project, engagement 
M4 Number of project 
consultations 
Flyers All stakeholders Awareness and promotion of the 
project, engagement 
M4 available. 
Distribution during 
all project 
Number of copies distributed 
Electronic 
newsletters 
All stakeholders Awareness and promotion of the 
project, engagement 
M6, M12, M18, 
M31, M37, M43, 
M49, M55 
Number of project 
consultations 
Press releases General public Awareness and promotion of the 
project 
M31, M64 Number of project 
consultations  
Trade 
fair/exhibitions 
General public and 
stakeholders 
Promotion of the project M12, M31, M43, 
M64 
Number of visitors and 
contacts 
Commercial 
posters 
All stakeholders Promotion of the project M12, M31, M43, 
M64 
Number of project 
consultations 
Scientific 
publications 
Academic and 
research community 
Awareness and promotion of the 
project 
M31, M43, M64 Number of citations 
Non-scientific 
publications 
Industry 
groups/Investors 
Promotion of the project M12, M31 M43, 
M64 
Number of project 
consultations 
Conference 
Presentations 
Academic and 
research community 
Awareness and promotion of the 
project, engagement 
Up to 4 during the 
project 
Number of spectators 
Conference 
Posters 
Academic and 
research community 
Awareness and promotion of the 
project, engagement 
M12, M31 M43, 
M64 
Number of project 
consultations 
Industry-oriented 
workshops 
All stakeholders Awareness of the project M37, M58 Number of attendees 
Guided visits to 
demo-sites 
Students and media Social and education training  M31, M58 Number of attendees 
3. Implementation
3.1 Work plan  
3.1.1 Overall structure of the work plan 
The project is composed by 8 work packages; each one follows a logical phase of the project. There is one work package (WP1) 
which addresses all preliminary actions for the urban biorefinery design. Four mainly technical, demonstration and validation work 
packages (WP2-WP5) and three work packages which support project activities as integration of results, LCA, LCC regulatory 
assessments (WP6); communication, dissemination and exploitation activities (WP7) and project management (WP8). The inter-
relation between the different work packages and Gantt chart are below. 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 35 
 
 
 
Figure 3.1a Graphical presentation of the components showing how they inter-related

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 36 
 
 
 
Figure 3.1b Gantt chart (Project suspension period in grey)
J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 Leader Other partners
WP1
Task 1.1 URBASER IMECAL, CIEMAT, AINIA, WUR, NOVO
Task 1.2 AINIA EXERGY, IMECAL, BPE
Task 1.3 NATURE PLAST ALL PARTNERS EXCEPT BCM
Task 1.4 IMECAL AINIA, URBASER, GID, UVA,CIEMAT
WP2
Task 2.1 IMECAL CSIC, CIEMAT, NOVO, VISUM/IRIS
Task 2.2 IMECAL CSIC, VISUM/IRIS
Task 2.3 CIEMAT  IMECAL, NOVO, VISUM/IRIS, CSIC, URBASER
Task 2.4 IMECAL CSIC, CIEMAT, VISUM
Task 2.5 CSIC IMECAL, CIEMAT, NOVO, VISUM/IRIS
Task 2.6 IMECAL CSIC, CIEMAT, NOVO, VISUM/IRIS
Task 2.7 CIEMAT IMECAL, CSIC
WP3
Task 3.1 URBASER AINIA
Task 3.2 WUR IRIAF, AINIA, URBASER
Task 3.3 AINIA URBASER, WUR
Task 3.4 WUR IRIAF
WP4
Task 4.1 UVA URBASER
Task 4.2 AINIA UVA, BPE
Task 4.3 UVA URBASER
Task 4.4 UVA URBASER
WP5
Task 5.1 CSIC AINIA, IMECAL, CIEMAT
Task 5.2 AINIA LEYGATECH, NATURE PLAST, NATRUE, URBASER
Task 5.3 BPE LEYGATECH, NATURE PLAST, WUR
Task 5.4 BPE AINIA
Task 5.5 BPE AINIA
Task 5.6 WUR NATUREPLAST, NATRUE
WP6
Task 6.1 AINIA IMECAL, CSIC, CIEMAT
Task 6.2 AINIA ALL PARTNERS EXCEPT BCM
Task 6.3 AINIA ALL PARTNERS EXCEPT BCM
Task 6.4 BPE ALL PARTNERS EXCEPT BCM
WP7
Task 7.1 BCM ALL PARTNERS
Task 7.2 BCM ALL PARTNERS
Task 7.3 BCM ALL PARTNERS
WP8
Task 8.1 IMECAL ALL PARTNERS
Task 8.2 IMECAL ALL PARTNERS
Task 8.3 IMECAL ALL PARTNERS
Task 8.4 IMECAL ALL PARTNERS
Task 8.5 IMECAL ALL PARTNERS
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 37 
 
 
 
3.1.2 Business plan 
The URBIONFIN business model has a whole value chain approach which integrates the business ambitions of the participant 
company partners including technology providers but also the bio-based products end users. 
Using CANVAS methodology the business plan proposed is detailed in further pages: 
Value proposition. Despite the improvements in sorting and recycling, a large fraction of Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) is still 
landfilled (31%) or incinerated (26%) across Europe. This practice is posing environmental concerns, as well as wasting potentially 
useful resources contained in MSW. Commission adopted in December 2015 an ambitious new Circular Economy Package. The 
revised legislative proposal on waste sets clear targets for reduction of waste and establishes an ambitious and credible lon g-
term path for waste management and recycling. To ensure effective implementation, the waste reduction targets in the new 
proposal are accompanied by concrete measures to address obstacles on the ground and the different situations across Member 
States. Key elements of the revised waste proposal include: 
✓ A common EU target for recycling 65% of municipal waste by 2030; 
✓ A binding landfill target to reduce landfill to maximum of 10% of municipal waste by 2030; 
✓ A ban on landfilling of separately collected waste; 
✓ Promotion of economic instruments to discourage landfilling; 
✓ Concrete measures to promote re-use and stimulate industrial symbiosis –turning one industry's by-product 
into another industry's raw material; 
✓ Economic incentives for producers to put greener products on the market and support recovery and recycling 
schemes (e.g. for packaging, batteries, electric and electronic equipment, vehicles). 
Differentiating and enlarging the biomass feedstock portfolio are key objectives of the bio -based industries in Europe. The 
abundance of sugars and other potentially interesting organic matter are identifying MSW as an alternative source of feedstock 
for the bioeconomy.  Exploiting MSW, one of many residual streams in today’s economic activities, as a biomass feedsto ck 
source, contributes to these goals. At the same time, utilizing MSW as a feedstock source for biorefineries helps realising the EU 
circular economy through industrial symbiosis, i.e. collaboration between producers to use each other’s by -products. The low 
economical value of state of the art recycled products from OFMSW like compost or biogas is limiting the sustainable 
implementation of separate sourcing systems since increasing citizen environmental (waste) taxes is then need to tackle important 
logistic costs. New biobased products can help to improve waste treatment environmental and socio-economical sustainability.   
What does URBIOFIN offer?. URBIOFIN project offers a feasible integrated biorefinery technological solution that converts 
OFMSW into valuable bioproducts. This new Biorefinery concept is composed by several integrated process technology units. 
The different interconnected modules that define URBIOFIN bio refinery are showed in previous Figure 1.3a. The biorefinery 
process units are adaptable to treat different MSW compositions, obtaining several marketable bioproducts as outputs. 
 
Table 3.1a Targeted biobased products to be obtained at demo scale during URBIOFIN project  
Biobased product Use/ final application 
Bioethanol Chemical building block for bioethylene production and elongation 
Medium and long chain fatty acids (MCFA/LCFA) Chemical platform for mcl-PHA production 
Biogas Chemical building block for scl-PHA 
Bioethylene gas Ripening Gas in Post-Harvest Fruit Chambers 
Short chain length polyhydroxyalcanoates (scl-PHA) Agriculture Bioplastic 
Medium chain length polyhydroxyalcanoates (mcl-PHA) Bioplastic for cosmetic packaging 
Aminoacids rich liquid fertiliser High added value liquid biofertilisers 
Dry Organic-Mineral Granules Solid Biofertiliser 
Advantages. URBIOFIN proposes an economical and technical feasible technology for the conversion of OFMSW by:  
✓ New bioBased products portfolio, as well as t echnology aligned with sustainability and waste EU -policies that 
minimizes the anthropogenic impact to the environment, contributes to the European sustainable bioeconomy and 
adds value in reducing European oil dependence, improving the innovation competitiveness of involved industries. 
✓ Economical feasibility . More positive than the competing technologies (composting, incineration and 
biomethanisation). No need to raise citizen´s environmental taxes or at less extent. The business analysis show a 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 38 
 
 
rentability of the URBIOFIN model, current waste treatment technologies are profitable only with the application of 
the rate of waste treatment57. 
✓ Tailor made . M odular design projects for each client, covering the geographical, compositional and seasonal 
variability of OMSW.  Versatile. The different units comprising the b iorefinery can be adapted to current MSW 
treatment plants. 
✓ Proven pre-industrial processes. The technical experience with the different demonstration processes units after 
URBIOFIN project realisation will prove a stable and competitive biorefinery process at semi-industrial scale, ready 
for scaling up to industrial level.  
✓ The different units composing the biorefinery will be adapted for dif ferent market bioproducts demand and 
replicability of the biorefinery model worldwide. 
Market. URBIOFIN market has been analysed from two different points of view: 
- MSW Treatment market for the Biorefinery technology (input of the biorefinery) 
- Bioproducts market (output of the biorefinery). The analysis of bioproducts obtained in URBIOFIN biorefinery was 
analysed in the corresponding bioproducts business cases (annexed). 
According to EUROSTAT official statistics, EU -27 countries generated 239 million tones of Municipal Solid Waste in 2014 . 
Treatment strategies are identified based on reported amounts of municipal waste l andfilled (27 .6%), incinerated (26 .8%), 
recycled (27.6%), composted (15.9%) and other (2.1%). “Composting” is defined in this statistic report as a biological process 
that submits biodegradable waste to anaerobic or aerobic decomposition  and that results in a product used on land or for the 
production of growing media or substrates. In 2014, 38 million tones of OFMSW were converted into compost or biogas, 24 
millions more than in 1995. A continuous growth is shown over the last 10 years . In that year, average production was 475 
kg per capita (16% to compost and biogas) , ranging from 759 kg per capita in Denmark to 272 kg per capita in Poland and 
Romania. The variations reflect differences in consumption patterns and economic wealth, but also depend on how municipal 
waste is collected and managed. Globally municipal solid waste (MSW) generation is approximately 1.3 billion tonnes per year 
and this amount is expected to increase to 2.2 billion tonnes by 2025 58. MSW management in European countries has evolved 
over the last two decades from a focus on disposal methods to a greater focus on prevention, recycling and valorisation. Moving 
municipal waste management up the 'waste hierarchy' (i.e. waste prevention, preparing for reuse, recycling, recovery and 
disposal) is a key way of extracting more value from resources while reducing the pressures on the environment and creating 
jobs. The global market for bioproducts is expected to grow to $700.7 billion by 2018, with a five-year compound annual growth 
rate (CAGR) of 5.5%.  The non-energetic market, the fastest growing segment overall, is moving at a tremendous 14.9% CAGR. 
The non-energetic bioproducts category, which includes chemicals and materials, is the largest and fastest moving segment in 
this market and is expected to reach $472.8 billion by 2018, up from $236.3 billion in 2013 59.  The market size and current sales 
of bioproducts derived from URBIOFIN biorefinery are described in table 3.1b and more details appear in Addendum 1. 
Table 3.1b Potential economic impacts of URBIOFIN bioproducts 
Bio-based 
product Current price (€ t-1) Market volume 
(ktpa) 
Current sales 
(m€ y-1) Expected price (€ t-1) 
Bioethanol 600-700 76,700 46,000-53,600 700 
Biomethane 1.4 (0.6 € m-3) 340 Mtoe* 153,000** 1.1 (0.45 € m-3) 
Bioethylene 900-1800 127,000 114,300-228,600 1800 
PHA 2000-10000 32 Mton/year-1 50-60,000 4000-7000 
Biofertilisers 200 and 6000 for solids 
and liquid respectively - 1.88 M€ year-1 250 for solid and 5000 for liquid fertilisers 
Biocomposites 500-5000 10 Mton year-1 6-8000 M€ year-1 500-2000 for pulp/PHA combinations and 2000-
10000 for PHA-based composites 
In order to estimate the market size for potential OFMSW treatment plants to address, we will first assume that a plant of 50,000 
tones of OFMSW can be enough to cover an area of 1 million people. As in January 2016, EU populations was about 510 million 
people, potential market for “existing plants” could be estimated up to 500 plants. Assuming a similar growth tendency of the last 
10 years (1995-2014), OFMSW bioconversion could rise from 16% up to 32% in the next 10 years (upto 2024) derived from the 
circular economy package, bio -economy, and other policies, the overall number of plants potentially adapted or created as a 
URBIOFIN biorefinery would be 1,000 plants (50% existing and 50% news). 
 
57 European Commision. Eunomia Research & Consulting Report 
58 World Bank/Hoornweg and Bhada-Tata, 2012 
59 http://www.bccresearch.com/pressroom/egy/global-market-for-bioproducts-to-reach-$700.7-billion-2018 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 39 
 
 
Existing alternatives. Current treatments technologies for OFMSW have been used for several years and are widely implanted 
technologies such as biomethanisation, composting or incineration. These technol ogies are considered as substitutive 
competitors of URBIOFIN. On the other hand, there are new MSW treatment technologies that can convert OFMSW into biofuels 
(direct competitors) (Figure 3.1c). 
 
Figure 3.1c Competitors of URBIOFIN: treatment technologies for OFMSW 
Out of all the MSW generated in the EU in 2014 (239 million tons, which correspond to 475 kg per capita), 27% is landfilled, 27% 
is recycled, 26% is incinerated, and 15% is composted60. 
Regarding direct competitors, there are several technologies for the conversion of OFMSW into second generation bioethanol 
and bioproducts, which are all of them at demonstration scale. Some of these  processes have been developed by Bluefire, 
Coskata, New Planet Energy or Fulcrum61. In these projects not only OFMSW is used as feedstock, but also agroindustrial wastes. 
The substrate is firstly pre -treated by thermochemical processes in order to make the cellulosic component accessible to the 
cellulases for t he subsequent enzymatic saccharification step. Sugars -mainly glucose - are released after the enzymatic 
hydrolysis and are then fermented to produce bioethanol or other intermediates. URBIOFIN offers a more complete exploitation 
of OFMSW resources.  
Customer segments. The main customers are the  EU local authorities (municipalities), which are responsible of OFMSW 
management. Statistics of MSW waste in the EU are offered in terms of kg per habitant or country as well as applied treatment 
(incineration, landfilling, composting or other). Behind this data there are a large number of local authorities or municipalities that 
alone or creating consortiums of more than one municipalities are responsible of MSW waste treatment. But, in  practice, 
municipalities normally use owned public or private waste companies to run MSW treatment plants. Access to building or 
exploitation contracts is only possible through public tenders. There are two possible scenarios. In one hand, new OFMSW plants 
where URBIOFIN biorefinery approach can be fully implemented, and existing OFMSW plants (producing compost and/or biogas) 
where all or one or more modules of the URBIOFIN biorefinery approach can be added to the available facility. To have a 
successful business is key to integrate bio-based product end-users in order to offer customers not only equipment for building-
blocks or final bio-based products production but also commodity/end product buyers. Despite the URBIOFIN consortium includes 
intermediate and end-users companies other end-users of similar profile are considered customers as well.  
Customer relationships. Access to building or exploitation contracts is only possible through public tenders for building new 
OFMSW treatment plants, or renewing existing facilities. Therefore, the consortium will invest resources (networking, visitin g, 
tradeshows, etc.) to interact with public authorities and improve position and knowledge of upcoming tenders. URBIOFIN offer is 
of special interest for Public Procurement of Innovation (PPI). PPI occurs when public authorities act as a launch customer for 
innovative goods or services. These are typically not yet available on a large -scale commercial basis and may include 
conformance testing as in the case of URBIOFIN.   
Channels. Priority to apply in public tenders for building OFMSW plants  is given to URBIOFIN participant companies, specially 
to URBASER that implement OFMSW plants worldwide. But if this company refuses to apply, agreements with other waste 
companies (i.e. in countries where URBASER is not operating) could be reached  to increase number and quality of channels . 
Networking with other EU waste companies is being considered in the business implementation  via technology licensing or 
specific agreements. A similar approach has been proposed for bio-based final products. Priority is given for example to NATRUE 
to buy the produced cosmetic packages. NATRUE (project partner) represents companies from an emerging market in the EU. 
NATRUE has been – and continues to be – involved in different projects in the fields of scientific research/innovation and 
regulatory affairs where it provides expertise. In this manner, NATRUE actively plays a key role in addressing both challenge s 
 
60 http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics explained/index.php/Municipal_waste_statistics#Municipal_waste_treated_in_Europe 
61 www.bluefireethanol.com, www.coskata.com, www.newplanetenergy.com, www.fulcrum-bioenergy.com  

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 40 
 
 
and opportunities in the Natural and Organic Cosmetics sector. The association nowadays has 49 members quotes Companies 
from 17 countries who actively participate to the association activities and marketing about 200 brands worldwide.  
The same for building blocks like PHA where priority is given to LEYGATECH. But if URBIOFIN companies refuse to buy the bio-
based intermediates or final biobased products produced by the customers, then, other EU end -users of a similar profile would 
be integrated via licence or other commercial agreement in order to always provide customers a reliable market uptake of thei r 
new biobased products. A key contribution is expected from members of the Advisory Group representing end users like MSW 
or agri-cooperatives and farmers.   
Key activities : Feasibility studies, a pplying to publi c tenders, d esigning, engineering, building up  and commissioning, post -
service, creating demand for biobased products, partnering and networking. 
Key resources Most important resources for the business development are project results and capacities and experience of the 
participant companies in the URBIOFIN consortium. 
Project results at demonstration scale are key resources for the business development: There are bioethanol and bioethylene 
production, efficient production of new strategic and added value market materials coming from organic matter residues like mcl-
PHA, scl-PHA, biocomposites and biofertilisers, as well as d ata mining tools and models as well as s ensors and system for 
process control and engineering of the integrated URBIOFIN process 
In the other hand, the different project partners involved in the project are in charge of different units’ development in order to 
build the URBIOFIN biorefinery as a whole. IMECAL (URBIOFIN consortium leader) will be in charge of the business development 
and future commercialisation, having into account the specific rules and IP protection of each partner that will be included in the 
Consortium project Agreement. The specific role of each partner in the business development is summarized in the next table, in 
order to obtain win-win solution for industrial business integration. 
Table 3.1c Business by partner 
Partner Role in business development 
IMECAL Biorefinery integration. Industrial scale process design and building up. Bioethanol unit technology developer jointly 
with CIEMAT. 
URBASER Biorefinery end user/developer. Biogas production unit technology developer. VFAs production unit technology 
developer jointly with AINIA. MCFAs production unit developer jointly with AINIA, IRIAF and WR. Microalgae 
production unit developer jointly with UVA. 
BPE Aminoacids production unit developer jointly with AINIA. 
Solid fertilizer unit developer jointly with AINIA. 
AINIA Industrial scale design and integrated process design of the biorefinery at industrial scale.  
NATUREPLAST PHA production unit developer jointly with IRIAF, WR 
LEYGATECH Bioproducts end-user. Bioplastics production from PHA in the agricultural market. 
NATRUE Bioproducts end-user. Bioplastics production from PHA in the cosmetic market. 
IRIS Sensors and systems for the process control and data mining tools and models, for biorefinery processes. 
NOVO Enzymes developer for bioethanol and biogas. Marketing of enzymes for process development  
CSIC Bioethylene from bioethanol process developer 
Key partners.  External partners to support the development of the URBIOFIN business will be invited to join the Advisory 
Group in order to get involved at the earliest stage of the business:  
✓ MUNICIPAL WASTE EUROPE  is the European association representing municipalities responsible for waste 
management and their publicly owned waste management companies, promoting public responsibility for waste 
management as a service of general interest. The members are national public waste associations and similar national 
or regional associations. They are committed to a sustainable waste management that minimise the impact on the 
environment and promote resource efficiency, taking into account local conditions. Municipal Waste Europe promotes 
the interests of its members at European level, through a joint position towar ds the EU institutions, and keeps its 
members informed on the latest EU policy developments. The association encourages the sharing of information among 
the members and the exchange of good practices in the local management of waste. 
✓ COPA-COGECA representi ng EU agri -Cooperatives to help market uptake of bio ethylene as a  fruit ripening gas, 
agricultural plastics and liquid and solid fertilisers. In 2013, there were 10.8 million agricultural holdings within the  EU-
28. An analysis by economic size shows that among these there were 6.5 million (or 59.8%) that had a standard output in 
excess of EUR  2 000. In terms of utilised agricultural area, France and Spain had the largest share of the EU -28’s 
agricultural land, with 15.9 % and 13.3 % shares respectively, while the United Kingdom and Germany had shares just 
under 10.0 %. By contrast, the largest number of agricultural holdings was in Romania (3.6 million), where one third 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 41 
 
 
(33.5 %) of all the holdings in the EU -28 were located. Poland had the second highest sha re of agricultural holdings 
(13.2 %), some way ahead of Italy (9.3 %) and Spain (8.9 %). 
✓ EUROPEAN BIOPLASTIC eV. represents  the interests of the thriving bioplastics industry. European Bioplastics 
is committed to driving the evolution of plastics by raisin g awareness across all relevant stakeholder groups about the 
benefits of bioplastics in reducing our dependency on fossil resources, reducing harmful greenhouse gas emissions, and 
using renewable resources more efficiently. European Bioplastics is uniquely  placed in the industry with an extensive 
network of businesses, partners, and experts in the bioplastics sector across Europe and beyond.  
Cost structure.   
✓ Fixed costs for centralised consortium activities after the project  like administrative, promotional and networking 
activities (steering committee meetings, commercial visits to public authorities, attending waste tradeshows, commercial 
commissions, etc.) to be proportionally shared by the participating partners.   
✓ Variable costs related to plant implementation  for materials acquisition, equipment manufacturing, transport and 
commissioning, technical support to customers, etc.) to be separately supported by the corresponding specialised 
partner, according with the results exploitation plan. 
Revenue streams.   
✓ Sales of equipment  including several modules: 2 -phase AD, bioethanol sacharification-fermentation tanks, 
catalysis reactors, biocatalytic reactors, photobioreactors and PHA fermenters. Exploitation of plants.  
✓ Revenues from licensing the technology to waste companies.  
✓ Sales of biobased products including bioethylene, PHA based waste b ags and agricultural bioplastics and 
aminoacidic microalgae based liquid biofertilisers.  
 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 42 
 
 
Key Partners: 
Members of the Advisory 
Group to help market uptake for 
the URBIOFIN technology and 
bio-based products: 
-Municipal Waste Europe.  
To disseminate project results 
and stimulate EU municipalities 
to tender the URBIOFIN mode. 
-Copa-Cogeca.  
To disseminate project results 
and stimulate EU agri-
cooperatives and related 
companies to use bioethylene, 
bioplastics and biofertilisers.  
-European Bioplastic eV. 
To disseminate project results.  
-NATRUE members.  
To stimulate the use of 
biodegradable p ackaging in  
eco-friendly and natural 
cosmetic products.  
Key activities: 
-Feasibility studies. 
-Applying to public tenders or 
direct selling.  
-Designing, engineering, 
building up and commissioning. 
-Post-service. 
-Creating demand for biobased 
products. 
-Partnering and networking. 
Value propositions: 
- Higher sustainable 
technologies to meet new EU 
organic waste 
legislation/policies while 
avoiding, or minimising, 
increase of citizen’s 
environmental taxes. 
-Helping existing OFMSW plants 
to diversify traditi onal recycled 
products (biogas and/or 
compost).  
-Demonstrated technical, 
environmental and economical 
feasibility of new biobased 
products from OFMSW like: 
bioethylene gas, scl- and mcl- 
bioplastics, and new 
biofertiliers.  
-Secure demand for the 
produced bio-based products. 
Customer relationships: 
- Public tenders  for building 
new OFMSW treatment plants, 
or renewing existing facilities. 
- Public procurement of 
innovation (PPI). 
- Networking and promotional 
interactions with public entities 
(i.e. i nvitation to URBIOFIN 
demo sites).  
Customer segments: 
-Customers are EU local 
authorities (municipalities),  
which are responsible of 
OFMSW management.  
In practice, municipalities 
normally use public/private 
waste companies  to run the 
treatment plants. Ac cess to 
building or exploitation contracts 
is only possible through public 
tenders.  
End–users for the biobased 
products: 
-Municipalities and w aste 
companies to use or to 
stimulate the use of 
biodegradable bags for waste 
collection.  
-Agri-cooperatives and similar 
companies to use bioEthylene 
as ripening gas,bioplastics and 
biofertlisers.  
-Cosmetic companies  to use 
bioplastics(NATRUE).  
Key resources: 
- URBIOFIN project results  
including demonstrated 
technologies and tested 
biobased products by end-users 
ready to market uptake.  
- URBIOFIN participant 
companies representing the 
entire value chain  from 
technology suppliers and bio -
based product end users.  
- Support provided by the 
URBIOFIN research and 
innovation entities.  
Channels: 
-Priority to URBASER. 
Leading European waste 
company specialised in 
OFMSW treatment which 
already operates in many EU 
plants. 
-Alternative: other public / 
private waste companies 
operating OFMSW plants in the 
EU if URBASER refuses apply.  
- Priority to URBIOFIN end-
users / buying companies for 
the bio-based products 
generated at the OFMSW 
treatment plants. Alternative: 
other end users.  
Cost Structure:  
-Fixed costs for centralised consortium activities after the project like 
administrative, promotional and networking activities (steering committee meetings, 
commercial visits to public authorities, attending waste tradeshows, commercial 
commissions, etc.) to be proportionally shared by the participating partners.   
-Variable costs related to plant implementation for materials acquisition, 
equipment manufacturing, transport and commissioning, technical support to 
Revenue Streams 
- Sales of equipment including several modules: 2-phase anaerobic digestors, 
bioethanol sacarification-fermentation tanks, catalysis reactors, biocatalytic reactors, 
photobioreactors and PHA fermenters.  
- Exploitation of plants (Figures 3.1h,i,j) 
-Revenues from licensing the technology to waste companies.  
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 43 
 
 
customers, etc.)  to be separately supported by the corresponding specialised 
partner.  
- Sales of biobased products including bioethylene, PHA for bags, films or 
packaging and aminoacidic microalgae based liquid biofertilisers (Table 2.1b) 
Figure 3.1d CANVAS of URBIOFIN project 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 44 
 
 
Economic data. 
The following table shows the economical data of the expected benefits by URBIOFIN partners due to the commercialisation of 
the technology (20 years projected). An estimate has been done with a medium plant capacity of 50,000 ton OFMSW per year, 
which corresponds to an average city of 1,000,000 habitants. 
Table 3.1d URBIOFIN expected benefits 
 
It is expected that once the first biorefinery is installed the technology sales increase. In any case, it is worth to consid er we are 
addressing an extremely large industry (hundred billion €) so the data shown in the table can be considered moderate.  Personnel 
plan has been estimated using revenues per employee as a metric. 62 (Every 305,170 € increase in turnover will require the 
recruitment of one new employee). With the aim of future commercialisation of the technology a viability analysis based on two 
business cases has been done: 
Business case 1 It is studied the complete implantation of a biorefinery for a 50,000 ton OFMSW/year treated, where the incomes 
from bioethylene, PHA, liquid and solid biofertiliser and biome thane have been included.  The expenses are associated to the 
operational costs and amortization costs from plant investment (Plant cost of 13 ,650,000 €, 10 years amortization time, 5% of 
interest). In this case the payback for the urban biorefinery is 3 years, and the return on investment (ROI) is around 30%. 
Table 3.1e URBIOFIN data business 1 
 
Business Case 2 It is studied the partial implantation of the urban biorefinery into an existing MSW treatment plant, which already 
has a biogas and solid fertiliser units. In this the modules are: bioethanol, bioethylene, VFAs, MCFAs, PHA, microalgae and 
aminoacids production units.  In this case the estimated plant investment is 10 ,950,000€. The expenses are associated to the 
operational costs and amortization costs (10 years amortization time, 5% of interest). In this case the payback for the urban  
biorefinery is 2.5 years, and the ROI is around 55%. 
In any of the previous cases the reimbursement from the waste disposal fees has been taken into account for the business 
profitability. In case of including the profitability of the business will increase, depending the tax rate (50-90 € t-1 MSW). On 
average, the payback for the URBIOFIN Biorefinery is 2-4 years. An increase in turnover often requires additional staff. Based 
in the URBIOFIN plant business model and business cases, around 135 employees will be created, in particular, 8 in technological 
development and 15 employees per plant with 8 projected plants in the next five years. 960 will be expected in 2035. In order to 
ensure a successful market penetration, the consortium has identified the first end-user for the roll-out stage. The Eco-Innovative 
technological solution will be fully implemented at commercial scale in Urbaser installations and in Municipalities of 
ACRPLUS organization. 
 
62 http://theglobal5000.com/using-revenue-per-employee-as-a-metric/   
2022 2023 2024 2025 2030 2035 2040
(TRL9) Market
Personnel Plan 11 11 23 115 172 229
URBioFIN Plants sales 1 1 2 10 15 20
Turnover (M€) 14 14 28 140 210 280
Benefits (M€) 3,5 3,5 7 35 52,5 70
URBioFIN Plant cost: 14 M€ all modules for a OFMSW treatment plant of 50.000 t/y
Business case 1: COMPLETE URBIOFIN BIOREFINERY 50.000 t/yr capacity
2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2030 2035
Personnel Plan (People) 14 14 14 14 14 14 19
Incomes (M€)          8,48         8,48         8,48         8,65         8,65         8,65         8,82         8,82   
Bioethylene  (M€)          5,85         5,85         5,85         5,97         5,97         5,97         6,09         6,09   
PHA  (M€)          0,06         0,06         0,06         0,06         0,06         0,06         0,07         0,07   
Liquid Fertilizer  (M€)          0,17         0,17         0,17         0,17         0,17         0,17         0,18         0,18   
Solid Fertilizer  (M€)          2,38         2,38         2,38         2,42         2,42         2,42         2,47         2,47   
Biomethane  (M€)          0,02         0,02         0,02         0,02         0,02         0,02         0,02         0,02   
Expenses (M€)          2,90         2,90         2,90         2,92         2,92         2,92         2,95         1,20   
Inves. Costs*(M€)          1,77         1,77         1,77         1,77         1,77         1,77         1,77   
Oper. Costs (M€) 1,13235 1,13235 1,13235 1,155 1,155 1,155 1,1781 1,20166
Gross profit (M€)          5,58         5,58         5,58         5,72         5,72         5,72         5,87         7,62   
Taxation (%) 25% 25% 25% 25% 25% 25% 25% 25%
Net profit (M€)          4,18         4,18         4,18         4,29         4,29         4,29         4,40         5,71   
Profit & Loss Statement
Cash Flow Statement
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 45 
 
 
Table 3.1f URBIOFIN data business 2 
 
Implementation strategy. 
The implementation strategy of the biorefinery technology is based on the different points agreed in the Consortium Agreement. 
Each partner protected the IP of the demonstrated technology developed in the different Biorefinery units. The implementation  
strategy needs to have into account the different points and actors for the technology commercialization plan development: 
1. Create a specific multidisciplinary team in charge of the commercialization Biorefinery technology. This team has  to be 
composed by people from the consortium companies with experience in the waste management, biotechnological process and 
bioproducts commercialization among others.  The commercialization team will actively participate in the communication, 
dissemination and exploitation act ivities of the URBIOFIN project in order to reach potential clients that have interest in 
implementing the technology at industrial scale in the medium term (1 to 3 years after end of the project).  
2. The main objective for the technology implementation is to build up the first industrial operation plant to integrate the technology 
in the MSW treatment market. With this purpose financing opportunities will be inquired (EU financial opportunities for firt industrial 
plants, etc)  
3. Develop a Specialist Company u nit for the direct production and commercialisation of the technology, using the IP of the 
consortium companies in order to offer a complete and integrate Biorefinery solution for the OFMSW treatment. 
Risks. The following table summarizes key risks to market entry of URBIOFIN technology and options for risk mitigation. 
Table 3.1g URBIOFIN market risks 
Description of risk Mitigation measures 
Poor yields o higher operational costs than 
expected in the process integration 
A contingency plan has been outlined in the work plan to ensure that the 
technology is cost effective 
Variations of feedstock composition URBIOFIN biorefinery has been designed to treat variable OFMSW 
compositions from different locations and seasons 
Bioproducts do not meet EU legislation/standards A full analysis of EU regulations and standards of developed bioproducts will be 
carried out during the project to ensure that they satisfy all legal/industrial 
requirements 
Lack of local and national authorities’ acceptance Local authorities are in the Advisory board of the project and will be closely 
involved in the dissemination activities of the project results and benefits 
Lack of end-user acceptance of bioproducts Effective communication and dissemination activities will be done to all 
stakeholders to promote project results and facilitate market entry  
Inadequate market analysis MSW treatment as well as developed bioproducts have large markets with 
growing demand as has been outlined in the business cases and plan  
Poor exploitation plan IPR strategy and exploitation plan are considered in the project work plan. 
Business models and plans for key projects results 
High costs in the industrial scaling up  The scalability of the processes will be validated during the project as well as 
economic projections of the full-scale production 
 
 
Business CASE 2: COMPLETE MODULES of URBIOFIN BIOREFINERY in a Current MSWTP 50.000 t/yr capacity
2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2030 2035
Personnel Plan (People) 15 15 15 15 15 15 19
Incomes (M€)          8,48         8,48         8,48         8,65         8,65         8,65         8,82         8,82   
Bioethylene  (M€)          5,85         5,85         5,85         5,97         5,97         5,97         6,09         6,09   
PHA  (M€)          0,06         0,06         0,06         0,06         0,06         0,06         0,07         0,07   
Liquid Fertilizer  (M€)          0,17         0,17         0,17         0,17         0,17         0,17         0,18         0,18   
Solid Fertilizer  (M€)          2,38         2,38         2,38         2,42         2,42         2,42         2,47         2,47   
Biomethane  (M€)          0,02         0,02         0,02         0,02         0,02         0,02         0,02         0,02   
Expenses          2,55         2,55         2,55         2,57         2,57         2,57         2,60         1,20   
Inves. Costs*(M€)          1,42         1,42         1,42         1,42         1,42         1,42         1,42   
Oper. Costs (M€)          1,13         1,13         1,13         1,15         1,15         1,15         1,18         1,20   
Gross profit (M€)          5,93         5,93         5,93         6,07         6,07         6,07         6,22         7,62   
Taxation (%) 25% 25% 25% 25% 25% 25% 25% 25%
Net profit (M€)          4,44         4,44         4,44         4,55         4,55         4,55         4,67         5,71   
Profit & Loss Statement
Cash Flow Statement
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 46
3.2 Management structure and procedures 
3.2.1 Organisational structure and decision making 
Figure 3.2a shows the URBIOFIN management structure, which is explained in detail below. 
 
 
Figure 3.2a Overview of URBIOFIN management structure 
The Steering Committee (SC) will have the overall responsibility of the project and will consist of one senior representative from 
each partner. The SC will be in charge of complying with the Grant Agreement and monitoring project progress against description 
of work. A SC meeting will take place every 6 months and the Project Technical Assistant appointed by the EC will be invited to 
attend. During these meetings, the progress achieved in the project objectives and in every Work Package will be presented, 
whereas the work plan will be defined for the next semester. The Project Coordinator (IMECAL) will have a main role in the 
coordination of the board and in cooperation with the other members of the Steering Committee will be in charge of: A) Content, 
finances and intellectual property rights definition (in close collaboration with the IPR Manager (BCM)) A.1) Collection of financial 
information fro m the partners and the provision of regular periodic reports to the BBI JU . A.2) Changes/setting up to the 
Consortium Agreement. A.3) . Looking for the proper potential investors in closed collaboration with the Exploitation Manager 
(BCM), interested in the project results. B) Organization of all Consortium meetings, Review Meetings and events. C) Evolution 
of the Consortium. D) Discussion and solving of business and technical problems that may arise in conjunction with the Scientific 
and Technical Committee, Innovation Committee and Business Committee. The SC will take decisions towards mitigation of risks 
that might jeopardize the effective progress of the project. E) Monitoring of results and establishment contacts with other relevant 
projects, clusters or initiatives (include samples related to objectives of the project). F) Developing the project dissemination and 
exploitation strategy under the hat of the Exploitation, Communication and Dissemination Manager. Each Member of the SC has 
one vote. 
The Project Coordinator (PC) will be responsible for the administrative, financial and organizational management of the project 
as a whole and will be the point of contact with the BBI JU. In URBIOFIN, the project coordinator will be IMECAL, represented by 
Ms Caterina Coll. She has extensive knowledge and expertise in the area of EU funding and project management and relevant 
expertise in the field of Waste Management and Renewable Technologies. Additionally, at the start of the project, a Financial  
Manager from the coordinating organisation will be assigned to support the project coordinator in the project coordination. The 
Project Coordinator shall have as responsibilities: A) Overall responsibility for the project; guarantees its continuity and 
consistency and all ocates its resources adequately. B) Handles any conflict resolution within the project, which could not be 
handled at a lower level. C) Monitors compliance by the parties with their obligations. D) Keeps the address list of members and 
other contact persons updated and available. E) Collects, reviews and submits information on the progress of the project and 
reports and other deliverables (including financial statements and related certification) to the BBI JU. F) Acts as the speaker of 
the project in all i nteractions with the EC and third parties. G) Consolidates the project planning, milestones reports, cost 

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 47 
 
 
statements and budget. H) Communicates with work packages in order to guarantee smooth progress and avoid delays in 
deliverables and milestones. The P C will act to mitigate the impact caused for these potential delays. If these issues are not 
resolved satisfactorily, these will be raised with the SC. I) Transmits promptly documents, minutes of the Steering Committee , 
Scientific and Technical Committee, Innovation Committee and Business Committee and information connected with the project. 
J) Monitors the implementation of decisions taken at consortium, SC, S&TC, IC and BC meetings. 
The Scientific & Technical Committee (S&TC) will be responsible for the technical progress of the project; it will comprise the 
leaders of each technical work package and will be chaired by AINIA. In close collaboration with the S&T Manager the Validation 
Manager (URBASER) will be responsible for ensuring a successful demonstration and validation of the innovative solutions. The 
S&TC will have significant role and will be responsible for the coordination of the technical aspects of the project and the proper 
identification of all interfaces. At management level, the mai n role of the S&TC will be to identify effective technical risk 
management in close collaboration with the Risk Manager ( IMECAL); means for follow up the technical achievements in the 
project and for technical decision support. The chair of the S&TC will organize technical meetings every 3 months with the 
cooperation of the work-package leaders. The main tasks of the S&TC are: A) Responsible for technical and scientific progress 
of the project and for completing successfully the S&T objectives and activities of the project in a timely manner. B) Responsible 
for the adequate focus and co-ordination of technical work within the consortium. C) Provide links of the project with other efforts, 
projects and overall initiatives that are related to the theme o f the project either from within the enterprises or outside of the 
enterprises at a national or international level. D) When necessary, e.g. due to a technological breakthrough, adjusts the content 
and direction of research. E) Identify possible technical problems and conflicts between the WPs that may restrain the projects 
technical evolution and will convoke a meeting for their resolution F) The S&TC is expected to meet in average 4 times a year . 
Telephone and web meetings will be used complementary to the physical meetings for keeping close track to the development of 
the subprojects. At the S&TC Meetings the WP Leaders will report the work status following the decision taking procedure 
established. The S&T Manager can request an urgent Steering Committee meeting to the Project Coordinator in case a strategic 
decision related to a Scientific or technical matter has to be made. 
The Innovation Committee (IC) will be responsible for increasing of the innovation level in the consortium, in RTD activities, in 
the business models, with a consequent harmonisation of the whole project management; it will comprise representative of each 
partner and will be chaired by IMECAL. The Innovation Manager (IM) will be responsible for advising the SC on contingency 
implementation. IMECAL will manage risk across the partnership and work packages. This will include maintenance of the risk 
table as well as the implementation of approved contingency actions. In close collaboration with the IC Manager, the Exploitation, 
Dissemination & Communication Manag er (ED&CM) represented by BCM, as major orchestrator of the internal processes of 
project management will have three main roles: A) The ED&CM will contribute developing and managing the dissemination 
strategy, monitoring the results and establishing contac ts with other relevant project. Moreover, the ED&CM manager will be in 
charge for the organisation of Workshops, conferences, training sessions and other events relevant to project promotion. B) A s 
responsible of exploitation strategy, the ED&CM will manag e the promotion of the solutions developed during the project. The 
ED&CM will look for potential stakeholders and investors, interested in the project results, and will be constantly in contac t with 
the public administration, to promote follow -up activities. C) In charge for Knowledge management and Intellectual Property 
Rights, the ED&CM will be available for discussions regarding IPR with the partners at any time during the project. To avoid the 
creation of conflicts with regard to rights of use and comme rcialisation of certain IPR arising from the project, the partners will, 
during the negotiation of the grant agreement, conduct due diligence to determine whether any partner has pre-existing obligations 
with respect to specific IPR. Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) is a major management issue in the exploitation and dissemination 
of scientific project results. Once a year, the Innovation Manager and the ED&CM will assemble the SC. Together, they will review 
the results generated by the project and update  the exploitation plan. The management of IPR will involve: a) Identification of 
patentable research findings b) Evaluation of whether to file for IPR protection or not c) Preparation of applications for IP R 
protection d) Determination of the rights of use for each single Innovative solution of the URBIOFIN project e) Exploitation of the 
IPR generated by the partners.  
The Business Committee (BC) will be responsible for developing a business strategy to take the project results closer to market 
including the identification of post project funding needs and funding opportunities. It will comprise representative of each partner 
and will be chaired by IMECAL, who will lead on the development of the commercialisation strategy in consultation with the 
different stakeholders within the consortium in order to facilitate commercial exploitation by the ED&CM. The BC will meet once 
a year to review the SC results generated by the project and update the business plan.  
The Advisory Board constitutes a consultation body that will comprise well-reputed experts in the sector of waste management, 
biomaterials, as well as municipalities’ representatives. Its purpose is to provide advice and guidance to the project. Furthermore, 
the Advisory Bo ard will ensure that the project management is constantly informed of significant changes in the knowledge 
domains and markets underpinning the project activities. The Advisory Board will operate mostly remotely in so called Virtual  
Joint Sessions exploiti ng teleconference facilities and/or via (e -) mail based interaction, but it will meet possibly at least three 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 48 
 
 
times in the project life span (at the beginning: M3, mid-way through: M31 and at the end: M55) by arrangement at venues to be 
agreed by members with the coordinating party in the composition that would most fit the needs of the meeting. 
The WP leaders (WPL) will be in charge of the implementation of the R&D activities at the WP level. The WPLs will be 
responsible for the coordination, planning, and monitoring of their work packages, i.e. they will coordinate the activities between 
the different partners collaborating on that WP and facilitate information exchange. Every WPL will also examine the deliverables 
provided by the partners from his/her WP and ensure that they are produced with the appropriate quality, on time and according 
to the budget. The WPLs will hold teleconferences as required with the PC, the SC and the S&TM. In summary, their main roles 
will be: A) To manage the scientific  and technical advancement of the WPs. B) To report and prepare proposals for the S&TM 
considering S&T aspects and to report and prepare proposals for the SC with regard to the achievements of the work plan and 
major budget allocations. 
3.2.2 Innovation management 
As URBIOFIN is a project with ambitious technological aims, the consortium needs to be ensured that in 4 years’ time the solution 
will still correspond to the market needs and represent an innovative technological approach, successfully replicated  and 
demonstrated. To achieve this, the URBIOFIN consortium shall make effort to understand and face both market and technical 
problems. The management strategy is recognized as a key factors for succeed in this aspect. Therefore, a special attention will 
be given to the following main managerial aspects (efforts are calculated for all of them in the budget):  
- At innovation and market side: A) A large industrial network will be brought to the consortium and project results in order to 
be sure that a leading market solution could be provided not more than 1 year period after the project end. For this purpose the 
consortium set -up 2 consultative bodies that shall ensure the project innovation, test the solution and provide additional 
requirements and know-how related to their own business processes. The consultative bodies are represented by the Innovation 
Committee and the Business Committee. B) Clear business plan and ownership rights agreement set -up still at the project 
beginning. C) A separate Exploitation Manager (BCM) experience in companies’ creation and business development will support 
the team during the entire project life-cycle.  
- At technical side: A) Requirements managements methodology set up from the project beginning: the experience achieved in 
large scaled research and innovation projects shows a clear need to identify method for ensuring the requirements management 
and proper validation when interdisciplinary research. It shall be specific for the project objectives but not consuming a lo t of 
personnel efforts as standard requirements engineering methods. B) Set -up an integration plan with respect to the interfaces 
management: follow up of the interfaces and setting up a plan with maturity levels for achievements for the entire solution 
integration will lead to a better cooperation, reporting among partners and objective oriented decisions-taken.
3.3 Consortium as a whole 
The project consortium includes 16 partners from 8 countries worldwide at almost all relevant levels (industrial, scientific and 
agricultural sectors) with broad and diverse wealth of experience of project partners and associated partners to allow co-creation 
(multi-actor approach). The integration of 8  countries into the project enables a widespread and country -specific view on the 
handling of MSW as well as about market strategies from different approaches. All consortium partners have extensive experience 
in European and international programmes and projects (see Table 1.3b and section 4). They are experienced in working efficiently 
within a consortium and will bring specific and complementary expertise. The consortium includes partners from research 
organisations, and academic sector combined with a high share of  SME and industrial sector. 10 from 15 project partners are 
involved as SME/industrial project partner with a share of total budget of approx 50%, as well as the leader is a SME partner. 
The industrial partners are involved to support the selected innovative approaches, to give technical assessment, to support the 
further technological development, to implement the project results and to support their marketability.  
The consortium is well equipped to work together to develop different work packages and to secure the commitment for the 
implementation of the joint activities. 6 of eight work packages will be organised by female WP leader (see paragraph 1.3.5). 
All parties will contribute to the project in a meaningful way and ensure that the geographical spread will be beneficial for the  
impact and sustainability of the collaboration and coordination of research programmes in Europe  and abroad. Table 3.3a  
describes the involved project partners and their main tasks within the project. 
Table 3.3a Partners role 
Participant  Role 
IMECAL IMECAL is the coordinator of URBIOFIN project. IMECAL will lead WP2 regarding the conversion of OFMSW to 
bioethanol as building block for the production of bioethylene, and will hold the corresponding demonstration activities in 
its PERSEO semi -industrial plant. IMECAL will also participate in WP1, WP6 and WP7 and will lead WP8 as project 
manager. 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 49 
 
 
AINIA 
Ainia will be focused in the development of two phase AD systems and in the VFA valorisation throughout the conversion 
of VFA to MCFA and later into PHA. Moreover it will participate in the valorisation of microalgae to biofer tiliser. Ainia will 
participate in almost all WP, except WP2. AINIA will also lead WP6 where the entire urban process will be integrated and 
optimised through virtual simulations as well as the project’s impacts will be assessed (economic, environmental and 
social) along with the study of all the potential regulatory and legal aspects which might impact on the project outcomes.  
URBASER 
URBASER will offer its R&D Center area to install new prototypes or pilot plants which allow the operation and validation 
of innovative technological solutions for the treatment of outlet streams coming from the fermentation process of municipal 
solid wastes, in order to get as much of high -grade valuable products (biopolymers, biomethane, microalgae) and 
maximize the valorisation of the organic fraction o f MSW (OFMSW). In particular, URBASER will participate in the 
anaerobic digestion of OFMSW for VFA production and biogas production through methanogenic steps (WP3, WP4), 
operating its anaerobic digester according to the project needs. Furthermore, Urbaser  will integrate of VFA, PHA 
production and microalgae processes.   
BPE 
Role of BIOMASA includes the participat ion in the following WPs: 1, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8, being related to biofertilisers  
development from organic fraction and microalgae extracts, under the form of solid and liquid by -products from down -
stream units of Fermentation, AD and Biomethane upgrading. Experimental formulation, legal and technical evaluation, 
as well as demonstration and dissemination activities. 
UVA 
The EnvTech group will be involved in the upgrading of raw biogas to biomethane in photobioreactors, the selective 
removal of siloxanes from biomethane in two phase partitioning bioreactors, the selective remova l of H 2S from biogas 
and its further bioconversion into high -added value products such as PHAs. EnvTech  will apply its 16 years of R&D 
experience in the design and operation of algal -bacterial photobioreactors to optimize the upgrading potential and 
maximize the production of biobased products. The group has successfully operated both open and enclosed 
photobioreactors under indoor and outdoor conditions for the treatment of domestic and livestock wastewaters. Besides, 
the broad experience of the EnvTech group in the operation of low -cost, high -efficiency bioreactors for waste gas 
treatment will be applied t o the selective removal of siloxanes and H 2S, and to the bioconversion of the raw biogas to 
high-added value products. 
NOVO 
Novozymes will sample enzyme products optimized for degradation of MSW and provide recommendations for 
optimization of enzyme application in the Perseo Bioethanol® process to enable cost -efficient conversion of MSW to 
sugars for further downstream processing into higher-value products. 
WR 
Wageningen Research will establish fermentation processes using Cryptococcus sp. for medium/long-chain fatty acid 
(MCFA/LCFA) based on the existing volatile fatty acid (VFA) stream and will establish a ferme ntation process for mcl-
PHA production using the VFAs and bio-ethanol as substrates and pure cultures of Pseudomonas putida as production 
organism. In addition, WR will be responsible for formulating/developing novel composites based on the biomaterials 
deriving from MSW (pulp, mcl-PHA, scl-PHA). 
CIEMAT 
CIEMAT will be focused on adapting/improving the PERSEO bioethanol production process to the new feedstock by 
optimizing pretreatment, enzymatic hydrolysis and fermentation steps. Apart from sugar recovery and ethanol yield, 
energy efficiency ratio, mass b alance and toxic compounds generation will be used for the estimation of the optimized 
parameters. CIEMAT will also assist IMECAL in the analysis of the fractions generated in the demo trials.  
VISUM/ 
IRIS 
VISUM/IRIS will participate in WP2 where they will test novel advanced sensors for monitoring selected process 
parameters and will integrate them at plant level together with a bespoke control system. They will also collaborate in the 
study of the relevant parameters to select the most suitable sensor technologies. They will also develop data mining tools 
to produce relevant decision support tools for optimally controlling production based on relevant process data. VISUM 
will also participate in WP1, supporting the w ork on preliminary actions for biorefinery design which will feed into WP2. 
VISUM will also take part in WP6, in the environmental, economic and regulatory assessments from the monitoring at 
plant scale point of view and will participate in WP7 by actively engaging in exploitation and dissemination tasks. 
NATURE 
PLAST 
Natureplast’s role will mainly be focused on characterizing the raw polymers (PHA) produced by the consortium, and to 
modify them to improve their processability and properties for the target ed applications. 
IRIAF/ 
GEACAM 
IRIAF / GEACAM will be in charge of the VFA valorisation throughout the conversion of VFA to MCFA and later into PHA 
in a demonstrative scale (bioreactor of 20 m3). Also, it will treat with a passive system based on constructed wetlands the 
wastewater generated once the microorganisms that accumulate PHA are separated. 
BCM BCM is WP leader of WP 7 “Dissemination, communication and exploitation activities”.  
LEYGATECH Validation of biopolymers produced at end-user level. The biopolymers will be tested in real manufacturing chains in order 
to produce bags and films suitable for project target sectors. 
NATRUE 
AISBL 
Coordination with supporting member companies from the association:  
- Development of packaging concepts and specifications for cosmetic applications 
- Studies on product-packaging interactions in specific cosmetic product applications 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 50 
 
 
CSIC CSIC will be focused on designing and building a pilot plant downstream for the transformation of the produced bioethanol 
in bioethylene. CSIC will also assist IMECAL in the operation and analysis of the fractions generated in the pilot plant.
3.4 Resources to be committed 
 
Below it is provided a more detailed description of resources allocation for WP2 Conversion of OFMSW to bioethanol as building 
block for the production of bioethylene, WP4 Biogas bioconversion to biomethane and added value products and WP8 Project 
management 
  
- WP2: Conversion of OFMSW to bioethanol as building block for the production of bioethylene 
 
IMECAL is the leader of WP2 and all the pilot plant adaptation, new module building up and demonstration activities of Module 1 
of URBIOFIN biorefinery will be located in its biotechnological demonstration plant (2000 m 2). These activities will include the 
demonstration plant adaptation to improve the feasibility and yield of bioethanol, to adapt the demonstration plant to new 
pretreatments, to adapt the plant to produce bioethanol as building block, the integration of the bioethanol-to-bioethylene unit and 
the development of a new monitoring system (Tasks 2.1. and 2.2). These activities require the involvement of engineers (1) 
technicians (2) and operators (4) in order to design and implement all the plant new modules (pre -treatment, 20 m 3 hydrolysis 
reactor, 50 m3 fermentation reactors, distillation units, and the installation of a new bioethanol-to-bioethylene operation unit). 
  
The demonstration activities planned in WP2 will be carried out during 40 months of the project in a continuous demonstration  
plant with the different raw materials defined in WP1 (Tasks 2.3, 2.4, 2.5). During the demonstration activities at semi -industrial 
scale, which will run in three-shift operation (24 hours a day), continuous results analysis (energy and mass balances, continuous 
process analysis (sugars, ethanol, inhibitors, etc), bioethanol yields, products characterisations, quality controls, etc.) will be 
performed in order to carry out the appropriate redesign of activities, materials dosage, process control, with the aim to im prove 
process performance. During all the demonstration stage several human resources (3 engineers, 3 technicians and 5 operators) 
are needed to cover all activities for the correct implementation of the project schedule. All IMECAL´s activities in WP2 wil l be 
carried out by own company personnel. 
 
- WP4: Biogas bioconversion to biomethane and added value products. 
 
University of Valladolid will be the main responsible for the design, construction, start -up and operation (including process 
monitoring) of 4 demo-scale technology set-ups in WP4 which includes: 1 ) 273 m2 photobioreactor interconnected to a biogas 
scrubbing unit for biomethane production), 2) a 10 m3 combined unit composed of a biotrickling filter coupled with a fermenter to 
bioconvert the H2S free biogas into biopolymers, including a biomass separation unit, adapted to the biogas production of the AD-
PHASE 2, 3) a gradual scale up to a 1 m 3 high mass transfer bioreactor for siloxane removal to polish biomethane. The 4 
technologies are intrinsically different in nature, purposes and monitoring needs, and will be run in continuous mode for at least 
26 months at the R&D center of URBASER in Zaragoza (Spain). These activities, included in Tasks 4.1, 4.3 and 4.4, will require 
a large effort in term of person months from the 5 senior researchers considered (1 full professor, 2 associate professors and 2 
assistant professors) for the design of the d emo-bioreactors (involving ATEX requirements due to the use of biogas as raw 
material), control strategies, process supervision and site visits. The construction, operation and monitoring of these indus trial 
scale units will require the active participatio n of at least 3 researchers and 1 technician hired under the project basis. The 
monitoring of these 4 processes will involve the development and validation of dedicated and time-consuming methodologies for 
the analysis of siloxanes, dynamics of microbial p opulation structure along the 4 year operation (using molecular biology 
techniques) and physical/chemical and instrumental analyses for the determination of the gas and liquid phase concentrations of 
CH4, CO2, O2, N2, H2S, N2O, volatile organic compounds, NH3, NH4+, NO3-, NO2-, SO42-, S2O3-, S2-, HS-, PO43-, total organic carbon, 
inorganic carbon, TKN, Total Nitrogen, Total and Volatile suspended solids, pH, alkalinity, BOD, COD and polyhydroxyalkanoates. 
The large amount of data generated from the optimiza tion of these 4 demo set -ups will also entail a significant effort in data 
analysis and report preparations.   
 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 51 
 
 
 
- WP8: Project management 
 
IMECAL is URBIOFIN coordinator and responsible to manage and assure the optimal implementation of this large innovation -
action project (4 years duration; 16 consortium partners, 4 advisory board members). This includes continuous reporting activities, 
administrative, financial and risk management, progress monitoring and preparation of projects meetings and reports as well as 
the exploitation and innovation management.  
 
In addition to that, it is important to highlight that URBIOFIN project includes several modules that will be interconnected and the 
coordination of them will require specific proactive human resources which would address the potential conflicts inherent to 
interrelated biorefinery technologies' projects. An intensive coordination effort is needed in this point in order to achive the project 
objectives. 
 
The project management requires exclusive staff dedicated to monitoring, quality control and project risk control. This requi res 
specific human resources to perform this control and obtain a successful project result. In this task 2 people are going to be 
involved during all the project time. 
 
Table 3.4a Other direct cost’ items (travel, equipment, other goods and services) 
1 IMECAL Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 23,000 2 meetings per year*2-3 people*750 €/person + 4 conferences/dissemination activities 
* 2 people  
Equipment 
308,614 
Depreciation cost of equipment calculated according IMECAL internal rules of 
depreciation (10 years for general equipment and fast depreciation for URBIOFIN 
exclusive equipment). Equipment Required in WP2 
Other goods and services  
424,533 
Workshop organisation, dissemination activities (WP7); Advisory Board costs; Audit; 
Waste transport to IMECAL and waste management costs; Lab and plant 
consumables and plant adaptation materials. 
Total  756,147  
2 AINIA Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 51,400 Travels to follow up activities WP3 in Zaragoza and Puertollano (around 136 travels 
during the project at 250€ person each travel). Rest of cost for project meetings. 
Equipment  0  
Other goods and services 
189,900 
16,500 € Lab materials, reagents for enzymatic reactions, and other lab scale assays 
costs. 2,000 € Auditing cots. 100,000 €: Shipping cost in WP3, 4 and 5. 20,000 €: 
Dissemination Events / Exhibitions; 14,400 €: Media monitoring / 37,000 € software 
licences GABI y ASPEN PLUS  
Costs of internally invoiced 
goods and services 19,700 Analysis performed in the own facilities 
Total 261,000  
3 URBASER Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 
5,052 
9 travel to consortium meeting - 2 consortium meeting/year + 1 kick-off meeting; 4 
travel for dissemination/share of the results - One congress/conference per year for 
dissemination of the results. 12 travel to visit other pilot plants (Valencia, Barcelona) 
Equipment 808,511 Pilot plant and equipment are required for with WP3 and WP4 and depreciation is 
calculated according URBASER internal rules 
Other goods and services  
197,900 
Consumables, parts and maintenance - Lab glassware, chromatography column, 
chemicals, assay kits and lab consumables are required for this WP. Audits,Fees 
Congress, Events or Workshop organization. Transport of vinasses from IMECAL to 
URBASER 
Total 1,011,463  
4 BPE Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 
82,000 
1.- (WP5) Important travel cost associated to technical BPE staff control field trials in 
Task 5.3. (1 field trial in Valencia-1 season), Task 5.4. (4 field trials x 2 seasons in 4 
locations in Spain and Italy) and Task 5.5. (1 field trial – 1 season) Calculation of 
partial cost: 6 trials x 7 control visit/trial x 1,000 €/trip = 42,000 € 
2.- (WP8)  Rest project management meetings and conferences 
Other goods and services 
98,000 
1.- Production of solid and liquid biofertilisers, 2.- Inoculants and additives for 
biofertilisers; (Power consumption, Small materials, Input material supply, Small 
repairing,  Shipments of material, Small auxiliary materials). Audit costs 
Total 180,000  
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 52 
 
 
5 UVA Cost (€) Justification 
 
Travel 15,000 Assistance to project meetings (at least one per year, two assistants). Participation in 
national and international conferences for project results dissemination. 
Equipment 145,800 Photobioreactor prototype (absorption column, settler, pumps, online analytical 
probes, others.).  
Pilot plant for PHA production (biological reactors, centrifugal pumps and blower, ). 
Lab and pilot scale plants for siloxanes removal (absorption column and biological 
reactors, pumps…).  
Other goods and services   
191,657 
2,000 € for external audit  and 175,000 € of consumables (similar for tasks 4.1, 4.3 
and 4.4): chemical reactants, sampling material, analytical consumables 
(chromatographic gases, liquid samples characterization, biomass characterization), 
gas standards for biogas and siloxanes, packing materials for bioreactors 
20,500€: One graphic animation video and infographics  
Total  
352,457 
 
6 EXERGY Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 3,170 Travel costs to project meetings for 2 people (9x2x8,000 €). Travel cost for 
dissemination activities (2x2x600 €) 
Other goods and services  4,372 Software: AspenOne (License for 12 month. 16,676 €), SimaPro (5,234 €) 
Total 7,542  
7 NOVO Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 6,000 Attendance to project meetings 
Other goods and services  188,000 Production of enzymes and shipping costs 
Total 194,000  
8 GID Cost (€) Justification 
 
Travel 4,181 Attendance to project meetings 
Equipment   
Other goods and services    
Total 4,181  
9 WR Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 29,000 8 project meeting, 4 conferences for 1-2 participants 
Equipment 25,000 Film evaporator + 3D-Printer 
Other goods and services  25,000 Consumable, Shipment PHA, Audits, Dissemination Activities 
Contracting 
15,000 
15,000 €: For outsourcing (or renting) large-scale Bead Mill facilities, for extraction of 
PHA from mixed or pure culture at Puertollano. 
 
Total 94,000  
10 CIEMAT Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 31,000 8 project meeting, 4 conferences for 1-2 participants 
Equipment   
Other goods and services 114,910 Audits, Dissemination.  
Transport of waste from the waste treatment plants to IMECAL (63,910€)  
Total 145,910  
11 VISUM Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 3,166.73 Travel costs to project meetings 
Other goods and services 1,120.30 Materials for the monitoring systems 
Total 4,287.03  
12 NATURE PLAST Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 20,000 Project meetings + travels for industrial trials 
Equipment 35,000 Use of industrial compounding line (to be bought end of 2017 – price 1,000,000€, 
depletion during 5 years, 2 months of use for the project) 
Other goods and services  50,000 Lab-scale developments of formulation/characterization of materials 
Total 105,000  
13 IRIAF Cost (€) Justification 
Equipment 40,000 Adapt  the CLAMBER Plant to the proposed process, some changes must be done  
Other goods and services  345,265 Consumables for the operation in the CLAMBER Plant (reactants, electricity, water, 
fuel, etc.) – Audit costs 
Contracting 
197,600 
180,000 €: Transportation costs of VFAs-rich stream from Zaragoza to Puertollano 
across the project 
17,600 €: 4 factsheets on important outputs targeted to each stakeholder group, final 
event (presentations, round table discussions, show benefit from synergies with other 
projects at national and EU Level) 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 53 
 
 
GEACAM (linked third party) 12,000 Travel costs to project meetings (8 General Meetings per 2 people) 
Total 596,865  
14 BCM Cost (€) Justification 
 
Travel 18,000 Travel from meetings in Europe plus overnight accommodation as required 
Other goods and services  18,200 Subscription fee European patent applications and specifications data base access , 
corporate identity (logo, generral project leaflet, general PowerPoint presentation and 
template), intranet (mange for documents, scientific publications, other content) , 
dissemination materials (leaflets, articles, roll -up banners, project poster, project 
presentation and research summary sheet templates) , Twitter, LinkedIn pages , final 
event (presentations, round table discussions, show benefit from synergies with other 
projects at national and EU Level) 
Total 36,200  
15 SES Cost (€) Justification 
 
Travel   
Equipment   
Other goods and services    
Total 0  
16 NATRUE Cost (€) Justification 
 
Travel 24,000 Travel from meetings in Europe plus overnight accommodation as required 
Other goods and services  1,000 Printing of presentation materials and dissemination of information at trade fairs and 
congress 
Total 25,000  
17 CSIC Cost (€) Justification 
 
Travel 15,000 Assistance to project meetings (at least one per year, two assistants). Participation in 
national and international conferences for project results dissemination. Travels to 
PERSEO plant for supervision of the construction and start-up of the bioethanol 
dehydration module 
Equipment 375,000 Bioethanol dehydration prototype (reactor, settler, pumps, online analytical probes, 
others.)  
Other goods and services  30,271 1000€ for external audit 
25,271€ of consumables chemical reactants, sampling material, analytical 
consumables (chromatographic gases, gas and liquid standards) and catalysts 
characterization 
4000€: Publications in Open Access  
Total 420,271  
18 IRIS Cost (€) Justification 
 
Travel 10,000 Travel costs to project meetings Installation and technical support trips (3 in 3 years). 
Equipment   
Other goods and services  111,000 Materials for fabrication of NIR monitoring systems, a viscometer and installation in 
pilot facilities, including automation hardware and costs associated with ATEX housing 
(103,000€); Cost of lab consumables for calibration tests and validation including 
chemical analysis (5,000€); Cost of IPR protection, dissemination material/events, 
publication fees for open access journal (1,000€); Audit Costs (1,000€); Transportation 
and insurance of prototypes (1,000€) 
Total 121,000  
19 LEYGATECH Cost (€) Justification 
 
Travel 16,000 Attendance to project meetings 
Other goods and services  29,000 15,000 € for Consumables such as resins for extrusion, 14,000 € for other costs of the 
running extrusion lines 
Equipment  15,000 Depreciation of special adaptation to the equipment 
Total 60,000  
 
Table 3.4b Summary of subcontracting costs 
Participant 
No. 
Participant 
Short Name 
Costs (€) Justification (Subcontracting) 
1 IMECAL 65,000 Subcontracting cost to certify the standardization of the bioproducts. 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 54 
 
 
2 AINIA 74,000 48,000: analysis of hydrolyzed microalgae (aminoacids, proteins, etc.) 
20,000: Webpage design, setup & maintenance 
6,000 €: 8 press releases in English 
3 URBASER 100,000 Technical assistance for reparation and maintenance of pilot plants: both digester using for 
the project, the current pilot digester located in the CIAM (Zaragoza) which its biogas will 
be extracted to introduce in the new building digester. This item will also be aimed at the 
laboratory technical assistance and calibratio n of equipment used to analyze the 
composition of biogas with MicroGC. Maintenance activities will be required to conserve as 
nearly as the original condition of the equipments associated to the digesters such as air 
and biogas compressors, boiler and high  pressure equipment. It also may include control 
joints for leak detection, digester blanketing, replacement filter cleaning… 
4 BPE 108,000 WP5: 96,000 €, dedicated to the performance through specialty companies of Lab test, 
Greenhouse test and Field tria ls, 1 in Task 5.3. (bioplastic in mulching in agriculture, 1 
location 1 season), 8 in Task 5.4. (solid and liquid biofertilisers in 4 locations 2 seasons) 
and 1 in Task 5.5. (liquid biofertilisers in citrus trees, 1 location 1 season) ; WP7:12,000 €, 
dedicated to sub -contracting external media and dissemination material and services for 
seminars (renting conference rooms, translation, webpage design and update, etc) 
5 UVA 20,000 The subcontracting cost is intended for the construction of the 273 m2 High rate algal pond 
in the R&D Center of Urbaser  in Zaragoza. The prototype will be employed in WP4 (Task 
4.1) for integral biogas upgrading into biomethane and algal biomass production 
6 Nature Plast 30,000 Development at lab -scale of formulations adapted to extrusion blowing / compounding, 
injection, and characterizations will be performed by Biopolynov. ~2,000 € per formulation, 
around 15 formulations. 
7 CSIC 17,389.30 fruit ripening trials 
* Transportations cost are quite high but this is due to the project has 3 different validations sites. If everything were located at the same 
place the cost to build everything will be higher (as minimum 5M€ in total inversion) 
 
Regarding the a dditional investments, it has been included  in Table 3.4c. All the additional investments in URBIOFIN  project 
contribute to the BBI objectives by addressing Value Chain 4 of the SIRA (Emergence of new value chains from (organic) waste: 
From waste problems to economic opportunities by realising sustainable technologies to convert waste into valuable products). 
Table 3.4c Overview of the total additional investments performed by the consortium members  
Beneficiary 
 
 
Activity (Description of the Additional 
Investment) 
Contribution to the 
BBI objectives  
 
Estimated value 
public 
investment (if 
any) 
(M€) 
Other EU 
funding received 
towards this 
Activity (if any) 
(M€) 
Estimated 
private 
investment 
(M€) 
IMECAL 
Civil works for the Bioethanol-to-Bioethylene 
module installation in PERSEO pilot plant 
Demonstrate a 
technology for the 
valorisation of 
OFMSW by its 
conversion to 
chemical building 
block (bioethanol) 
for the production of 
chemicals 
(bioethylene) 
 
 
- - 0.05 
Equipment adquired during the project for the 
demonstration activities in the pilot plant 
whose costs will not be charged in the 
“equipment direct costs” associated to 
amortization costs requested in the project 
- - 0.7 
 
    
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 55 
 
 
BPE 
Investment in its “Algodor  R&D&I and 
Experimental production Centre” in Toledo 
during the project. 
Demonstrate and 
validate a 
technology at TRL 
6-7 for the 
production of 
biofertilisers 
departing from the 
fermentation residue 
of the OFMSW plus 
additives and 
functional microbial 
inoculants, covering  
the whole value 
chain for 
valorisation of 
OFMSW 
- - 0.12 
Further investments to upgrade the new 
installation for biofertilisers production 
Scale up to small 
scale industrial 
biofertilisers 
production plant 
TRL 9 from the 
fermentation residue 
of the OFMSW, 
after the project 
finishing 
- - 0.6 
URBASER 
Investment to adequate UTE Ebro facilities 
(trommel, conveyor belts , etc.) to provide 
samples of OFMSW to the demonstration 
digester under the required conditions 
(composition, particle size, etc.). 
For the project 7-10 tons of OFMSW per day 
to feed the first digester (hydrolytic digester) 
are needed. Due to the large volume of 
OFMSW required, the industrial facilities 
(UTE-EBRO) where is loc ated Urbaser 
Research Center (CiAM) has to be adapted. 
This modification is necessary because the 
industrial facilities cannot supply the amount 
of sample required. Conveyor belts and 
trommel screens need to be installed  in the 
industrial plant after their grinder/shreddes 
and before the industrial digesters to supply 
the required OFMSW to URBIOFIN. 
Adapt a technology 
that contributes to 
the use of OFMSW 
as an alternative 
source of feedstock 
for the bioeconomy 
 
- - 0.15 
Civil works for the 2 -phase anaerobic 
digestion system in CIAM's instalations. 
Demonstrate and 
validate a 2-phase 
anaerobic digestion 
system for the 
conversion of 
  0.08 
Equipment adquired  during the project for 
demonstration activities in the pilot plants
0.5 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 56 
 
 
whose costs will not be charged in the 
"equipment direct costs" associated to the 
amortization costs requested in the project 
OFMSW to VFAs for 
the production of 
PHA 
TOTAL
2.2 
 
 
  
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 57 
 
 
4. MEMBERS OF THE CONSORTIUM
4.1 Participants 
 
PARTNER 1. Coordinator 
Name: Industrias Mecanicas Alcudia S.A. 
(IMECAL) 
Web page: www.imecal.com/perseo  
Type: SME 
Country: Spain  
Brief description of the organization:  
IMECAL is a SME which was founded in 1979 as an engineering company in the metal sector, working on demand and 
manufacturing all type of metal -mechanical equipment for civil works, petro -refineries and petrochemical, transportation, 
refrigeration industry, industrial auxiliary motor and ceramics industry, among others. R & D IMECAL Department has allowed 
the company to progress in the technological field, having made significant partnerships with companies, universities and public 
research organizations. The R&D line o f production technology for second generation bioethanol has developed a 
biotechnological patented technology for obtaining bioethanol from Organic Municipal Waste. In 2007 IMECAL built a second 
generation bioethanol plant with a capacity to process 25 ton /day of organic fraction of MSW (PERSEO Bioethanol®). Since 
this year IMECAL has participated in different projects to test and improve PERSEO technology to different MSW raw materials 
with different companies. IMECAL is member of the Biofuels TP Platform-European Union, and participates actively in several 
national and international conferences on biofuels. 
 
Role in the Project:  
IMECAL is the coordinator of URBIOFIN project. IMECAL will lead WP2 regarding the conversion of OFMSW to bioethanol as 
building block for the production of bioethylene, and will hold the corresponding demonstration activities in its PERSEO semi-
industrial plant. IMECAL will also participate in WP1, WP3, WP5, WP6 and WP7, and will lead WP8 as project manager.  
Scientific team:  
Ms. Caterina Coll Lozano, PMP ® (F), Chemical engineer by the Higher Technical School of Industrial Engineers of the 
Polytechnic University of Valencia. Project Management Profesional (PMP®) certificate by Project Management Institute (PMI). 
Executive MBA by Bussines & Marketing School ESIC. Master degree in environment coursed in the Department of Chemical 
and Nuclear Engineering from the Polytechnic University of Valencia. Technical Industrial engineer in Chemist by the Technical 
School of Industrial Engin eering of the Polytechnic University of Valencia. Stay in the "School of Science" of “Institute of 
Technology Sligo" in Sligo (Ireland). Stay on the Biomass Unit of the Division of Renewable Energy from the department of 
Energy of CIEMAT. Professional expe rience of over 15 years in process engineering and environment, mainly developed in 
CEAM (“Centro de Estudios Ambientales del Mediterraneo”) as Head of laboratory and environmental projects, and in IMECAL 
as Plant Manager of second generation bioethanol pi lot plant PERSEO, and R&D Manager. Over the last years he has 
coordinated and participated in several projects at national and international level and performed scientific and technical 
publications in various journals, books and conference contributions. 
Dr. Ing. Marcos Latorre Sánchez  (M) , Chemical Engineer by the Higher Technical School of Industrial Engineers of the 
Polytechnic University of Valencia. Masters in Design for Sustainability from Cranfield University (England). PhD in Green 
Chemistry at Institute of Chemical Technology (Polytechnic University of Valencia - Spanish National Research Council). Stay 
at Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces (Germany). He has more than 6 years of experience in new materials 
development at laboratory and pilot scale and advanced characterization for renewable energy systems. He has participated 
in a number of R&D nationally and internationally funded projects aimed at the valorisation of biomass into higher valuable 
products. He is author of 10 papers in peer-reviewed journals and has participated in different international conferences. 
Mrs. Sara Castelló Andrés (F), Mrs. Castelló holds a degree in Food Science and Technology (University of Valencia, 2006) 
and a Master in New Functional Foods (Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, 2013). She has 13 years of experience managing 
and coordinating national and European projects including H2020, FP6, FP7, Life+, LLP and CIP-Ecoinnovation programmes 
among others. She has been the project manager for BioliSME, PHBottle, Eco3cip, e-skill, GreenPoint projects. She has also 
been workpackage leader in OptiNanoPro (Innovation Manager), Knowledge2Innovation, Ozonecip and the HELENA Study 
projects. For the last 1 6 years she has participated in research projects dealing with up grading, waste management, food 

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 58 
 
 
biotechnology and development of bioactive ingredients, but also in industrialization projects for the upscaling and construction 
of demonstrative plants in start -up companies. Since May 2017, she works as R&D project manage r at IMECAL, as team 
member of the EU projects URBIOFIN, PERCAL and WASTE2BIO. 
Ms. María Frau Martínez (F) , Technical Agricultural Engineering by the Polytechnic University of Valencia. International 
Welding Specialist (IWS) by CESOL. Senior technician in occupational risk prevention in the fields of occupational safety 
(CIEGS, Polytechnic University of Valencia), Ergonomics and Applied Psychology (IMF) and Health at Work (IMF). Extensive 
experience in handling graphic design programs like Auto-Cad, Inventor, Solid Works and Lantek among others. Professional 
experience in process engineering in Bonduelle Iberica SAU (Frudesa) and currently as a mechanical and process engineering 
in IMECAL, where performs mechanical and industrial design projects. 
Mr. Jaime M esa Arguello (M) , Industrial Engineer by the Polytechnic University of Valencia. Technical specialist in 
engineering design with CAD Software, manufacturing and inspection of pressurized tanks. Professional experience in R&D 
projects development and process engineering at IMECAL, where performs mechanical and industrial design projects. 
Mr. Juan Manuel Ferri Palop (M), Telecommunications technical engineer (Electronic Systems specialty) by the Polytechnic 
University of Valencia and Fachhochschule Ulm - Hochschule für Technik (Germany). Technical specialist in electronic 
systems, computer design and modelling programs. Professional experience in R&D projects development, and process 
engineering at IMECAL SA., where performs mechanical, electrical and industrial design projects. 
Related publications, patents or products: 
- Method for Recovering Energy from the Organic Fraction of Solid Urban Waste and Associated Facility. Signes Nunez, 
Vicente; Ballesteros Perdices, Mercedes; Ballesteros Perdices, Ignacio; Manzanares Secades, Paloma; Martinez Garcia, Jose 
Maria; Negro Alvarez, Maria Jose; Oliva Dominguez, Jose Miguel; Castaneda Sanchez, Rafael; Coll Lozano, Caterina. Spanish 
patent nº 2303792, European Patent EPO 2112226, USA Patent 8399228 B2 and international PCT WIPO 099038. 
- Ballesteros, M., Sáez, F., Ballesteros, I., Manzanares, P., Negro, M.J., Martínez, J.M., Castañeda, R., Oliva Dominguez, J. 
M., 2010. “Ethanol production from the organic fraction obtained after thermal pretreatment of Municipal Solid Waste”. Appl 
Biochem Biotechnol (2010) 161:423–431. 
- Coll, C., Signes, V., 2012. “PERSEO Bioethanol®: Obtención de bioetanol y combustible orgánico a partir de RSU”. 
INFOENVIRO, nº 72, p. 49-42, 2012. 
- Signes Palop, J.F., Sempere Payá, V.M., Coll Lozano, C., 2012. “Sistema de comunicaciones para el control de una planta 
de biocombustibles”. Automática e Instrumentación, nº 444, p. 40-42, 2012. 
- Castañeda, R., Coll, C., Signes V., Ballesteros, M., 2007. “Proyecto PERSEO. Innovación tecnológica para el bioetanol de 
segunda generación”. RETEMA, nº 121, p.50-56, Especial biomasa 2007. 
Related Projects: 
 
Project 
acronym/description. Scope End Year Website  
LO2X: Supercritical water 
co-oxidation of urban 
sewage sludges and wastes 
Demonstration of the 
environmental and socio-
economic benefits of a 
synergic co-treatment of 
sewage sludge and wastes 
with energy and phosphorus 
recovery through 
supercritical water co-
oxidation 
2016 www.lo2x.com  
BIOFORSU: Valorisation of 
the organic fraction of 
municipal solid wastes by 
conversion to bioethanol 
and combustible biomass 
Demonstration of the 
environmental and  techno-
economic benefits from the 
conversion of OFMSW into 
bioethanol and energetic 
valorisation of the 
fermentation residue 
2013 - 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 59 
 
 
BIOFUEL: Development for 
a new integral waste 
treatment process with 
production of liquid biofuel 
Demonstration of a new 
waste treatment process to 
transform OFMSW into 
bioethanol as biofuel 
2009 - 
ATENEA: Production of 
bioethanol from citrus 
wastes 
Demonstration of a viable 
technology to convert citrus 
wastes into bioethanol and 
bioproducts 
2008 http://www.imecal.com/pers
eo/ 
PERSEO: Production of 
bioethanol from organic 
municipal solid wastes 
Demonstration of a viable 
technology to convert 
OFMSW into bioethanol as 
liquid biofuel and 
combustible biomass as 
solid biofuel 
2006 http://www.imecal.com/pers
eo/ 
 
 
Technical equipment: 
- - 25,000 m 2 of metal-mechanic engineering facilities to transform metallic plates and sheets to a wide variety of industrial 
equipments: pipes, chemical reactors, distillation columns, etc. Machinery includes: Laser cutting, forming, machining, blasting, 
passivating, assembly and welding. 
- - 2,000 m2 semi-industrial biotechnology plant (PERSEO Bioethanol®) with a capacity to process 25 ton/day of organic fraction 
of MSW. The plant includes the following units: Pre -treatment, Fermentation, Solid -Liquid Separation, Disti llation, Effluent 
Treatment, Auxiliary Systems, Final Product Storage, Control.  
- - Two physical-chemical laboratories included in the PERSEO semi -industrial plant, with different equipment: High pressure 
liquid chromatography, analytical balance, thermo -balance, centrifuge, microbiology fume extraction, pH meters, incubators 
with orbital shakers, solid grinders, oven, kiln, autoclave. 
 
 
Pictures of bioethanol PERSEO semi-industrial plant and its laboratories 
 

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 60 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PARTNER 2 
Name: ainia 
Web page: www.ainia.es 
Type: RTO 
Country: SPAIN 
 
Brief description of the organization:  
ainia is a RTD centre focused in the agro-food sector and related industries. Nowadays, ainia has more than 700 food SME´s 
company members of its organization. The aim of the centre is to promote research and technological development in the agro-
food sector, to increase quali ty in production, improve competitiveness and promote modernization and diversification in the 
agro-food industries. This is achieved providing a wide range of technological services to its members, through the execution 
of scientific research projects and technology transfer to the industry. ainia staff is composed by around 180 people.  
The work team involved in this project is formed by Environmental Management researchers with wide experience in areas of 
activity related with the project: development of new biomass pre-treatments, alternative substrates and energy crops, 2-stages 
fermentation, Anaerobic Digestion -biorefineries, VFA and nutrient recovery, reduction of biological risks, digestate -based 
fertilisers, control and modelling of the AD process and advanced microbial characterization. 
 
Role in the Project: ainia will be focused in the development of two phase AD systems and in the VFA valorisation throughout 
the conversion of VFA to MCFA and later into PHA. Moreover it will participate in the valorisation of microalgae to biofertiliser. 
Ainia will participate in all WP, except WP2, and will lead WP1 . AINIA leads the WP6 where the entire urban process will be 
integrated and optimised through virtual simulations as well as the project’s impacts will be assessed (economic, environmental 
and social) along with the study of all the potential regulatory and legal aspects which might impact on the project outcomes. 
Scientific team:  
Sara TENA (F) . Sara is a Chemical Engineer with more than sixteen years´ experience in industry and consultancy. Her 
specialist technical areas include process and energy modelling, techn ical and economic feasibility studies (TEA), project 
concept design, and technical project management. Over the last twelve years Sara has worked as energy engineer and 
consultant for an international engineering firm, delivering multiple TEA studies on en ergy and bioenergy projects, including: 
biogas and biomethane to grid plants; solid biomass combustion; energy from waste; combined heat and power and district 
heating projects. Sara recently joined AINIA as a Project Manager working on biorefinery, bioene rgy and wastewater projects 
and she is currently coordinating the URBIOFIN project internally at AINIA. 
Gracia SILVESTRE (F) is PhD Chemical Engineer and has more than seven years of experience in anaerobic digestion 
technologies with special focus in the co-digestion strategies of organic wastes. Experience in participation and technical 
execution of diverse R&D projects and te chnical assistances in the biogas field. Experience in related projects: SOSTRICE 
project (ongoing; she is involved in researching activities related to demonstration plant testing), AD -WISE project (she was 
involved in calibration activities of the SVFA s ensors for optimized control of AD plants) and SLUDGE4ENERGY project (she 
developed the pilot plant trials using a 2-phase anaerobic digestion pilot plant).  
Paz GÓMEZ (F) is Agricultural Engineer, specialization on Rural Engineering, and has more than eight years of experience on 
the field of anaerobic digestion of agroindustrial waste, including agronomic valorisation of the digestate. Experience in related 
projects: BIOMAN project, focused on enzymatic and mechanical pretreatments to increase biogas prod uction from 
lignocellulosic substrates (AD trials to test pretreatments effect); DIGESMART project, focused on digestate from manure 
recycling technologies (evaluation of the process of stripping), and AGROBIOMET project, focused on sustainable production 
and use of biomethane as vehicle fuel using manure and alternative biomasses (she was working on the AD pilot trials). 
Andrés PASCUAL (M) is Agricultural Engineer with more than 15 years of work experience in R&D projects, with special 
focus on the optimisation of anaerobic digestion and digestate valorisation. Co-ordinator of the PROBIOGAS I+D project 
(2007-2011), which is a biogas key project in Spain with 30 partners and 9M€ budget. Consultant of IDAE (Ministry of Industry 

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 61 
 
 
and Commerce of Spain) for biogas issues. Also co-ordinator of LIFE biogas related projects like INTEGRAL-B. He will 
supervise coordination of the AINIA team in the project as department leader. 
Alfredo RODRIGO (M). PhD in Chemistry since 1996 and Agricultural Engineer by the Technical University of Valencia (Spain). 
He works as project manager in AINIA since 1997 in the Department of Environment, Bioenergy and Industrial Hygiene. Senior 
expert with 5 years experience as researcher on groundwater pollution by agricultural activities and 18 years-experienced on 
environment in food industry including: environmental diagnosis, energy audits, life cycle assessment and carbon footprint 
calculation of food companies and products and renewable energy technologies (biogas, biodiesel, microalgae).  Participation 
in several R&D national and international projects on cleaner production and organic waste valorisation (LIFE+ ECODHYBAT, 
Life+ INTEGRAL-B, KBBE FP-7 SUSCLEAN).  
Juan Carlos LÓPEZ (M). Dr. Juan Carlos López holds a PhD in Chemical and Environmental Engineering from the University 
of Valladolid (Spain). He has >6 years of experience in anaerobic digestion -based biorefineries, with a special focus on 
biological gas treatment and valorisation to high -added value products (biopolymers, volatile f atty acids, microalgal -based 
fertilizers). During his scientific career he has actively participated in both national and international projects and confe rences 
related to greenhouse gases revalorization and biorefineries and has published high -impact research articles (13) and book 
chapters (3). Currently, Juan Carlos currently works as Biorefineries Project Manager at AINIA, focused on gas fermentation 
technologies and bioprocesses devoted to generate bio-based products from different wastes. 
 
Related publications, patents or products: 
- Silvestre, G., Bonmatí, A., & Fernández, B., 2015. “Optimisation of sewage sludge anaerobic digestion through co-digestion 
with OFMSW: effect of collection system and particle size”. Waste Management, 43, 137-143. 
-Pascual A., Regueiro L., Silvestre G., 2015. “Agro-industrial biogas plants evolution towards new models base don biorefinery 
concept”. RETEMA, 185, Bioenergy edition. 
- Silvestre G., Gómez M. P., Pascual A., Ruiz B., 2013. “Anaerobic Co-Digestion of Cattle Manure with Rice Straw: Economic 
& Energy Feasibility”. Water Science and Technology 67(4) 745-755. 
-Regueiro, L., Carballa, M., Álvarez, J. A., & Lema, J. M., 2012. “Enhanced methane production from pig manure anaerobic 
digestion using fish and biodiesel wastes as co-substrates”. Bioresource technology, 123, 507-513 
- Silvestre, G., Rodríguez-Abalde, A., Fernández, B., Flotats, X., & Bonmatí, A., 2011. “Biomass adaptation over anaerobic co-
digestion of sewage sludge and trapped grease waste”. Bioresource technology, 102(13), 6830-6836. 
Related Projects:  
 
Project acronym/description. Scope End 
Year 
Website  
WHEYPACK. Reduction of CO2 
emissions by the PHB use obtained from 
whey: demonstration in dairy products 
packaging. LIFE13 ENV/ES/000608 
(2014-2016) 
Demonstration of reduction of CO2 
emissions by PHB from whey in dairy 
products packaging. 
2016 http://www.wheypack.eu/eng/ 
SOSTRICE. CO2 Emission Reduction of 
Rice Cultivation through Energy 
Valorisation of the Rice Straw. LIFE13 
ENV/ES/001333 (2014-2017) 
Implementation of prototypes (AD 
and combustion), for rice straw 
valorisation and Life Cycle Analysis 
to evaluate these technologies under 
real conditions 
2017 http://www.sostrice.eu/es/ 
BIOMAN. Economically efficient biogas 
production from manure fibres and 
straw. FP7 (2007-2013) 
Development of physical and 
enzymatic pre-treatment strategies 
and technology for biogas plants for 
agricultural sector. 
2015 http://bioman.dti.dk/ 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 62 
 
 
SLUDGE4ENERGY. Maximization of 
energy obtaining from sludge through 
synergy process of oxidation and 
digestion. PROGRAM INNPACTO. 
MINECO (2011-2014) 
Development of a process combining 
oxidation and digestion for 
maximization of energy from sludge. 
2014 http://www.sludge4energy.es/ 
PROBIOGAS. Development of 
sustainable systems of production and 
use of agro industrial biogas in Spain. 
PS-120000-007-6. MINECO. (2007-
2013) 
Focused on sustainable biogas 
production systems development: 
research on Spanish agro wastes 
and demonstration plants 
2013 www.probiogas.es 
 
 
Technical equipment: 
Ainia’s infrastructure relevant to the proposed work: 
- Pilot biomethanation unit (72 batch digesters) to carry out test of biogas potential (maximum biogas potential according to VDI 
4630 standard). 
- Continuous pilot biomethanation unit (15 digesters with 30 L working volume, 1 digester with 3 L working volume, 2 -phase 
digester system: 10 L and 15 L working volume for each digester, 1 digester with 2 m 3) to develop small scale digestion 
simulation. This facility makes possible the determination of yield and composition of biogas, optimum composition of feed, 
optimum organic loading rate and digestate quality. 
- Chemical analysis, Chromatography laboratory, Microbiological analysis and molecular biology laboratory.  
- In ainia headquarters in Paterna (Valencia, Spain), it is feasible to conduct workshops, training activities as wel l as 
dissemination activities for an audience of 120 people 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 63 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PARTNER 3 
Name: URBASER S.A. 
Web page: http://www.urbaser.es/ 
Type: Large Industry 
Country: SPAIN 
 
Brief description of the organization:  
URBASER belongs to the group ACS (“ Actividades de Construcción y Servicios ”), which is a worldwide reference in 
infrastructures, industrial services, energy and environment. 
The environmental company URBASER is leader in waste management and treatment in Spain. It  specializes in street 
cleaning, waste removal and transporting, urban waste treatment and recycling, waste to energy facilities and comprehensive 
management of the water cycle and urban landscape and gardening.  
URBASER is the leader in removal and treatment of used mineral oils and treatment and removal of industrial waste.  
URBASER covers the entire value chain when providing these services, from designing and conception, carrying out the 
project, construction, financing and operating a highly-qualified professional team.   
URBASER also operates in the field of renewable energies with a view to limiting the negative impact of greenhouse gases, 
for the purpose of which it is developing treatment processes for alternative sources of energy, biomass from bio mass crops, 
waste woodland mass, biodegradable, agricultural and industrial waste. 
Urbaser achieved a business turnover of 1.498 million € in 2010 with a highly -qualified staff of more than 30.000 people and 
over 160 subsidiary companies forming the group.  It provides services to more than 50 million people and is active in 4 
continents. The main magnitudes are as follows:  
•   232 MW installed in renewable sources of energy, with a production of 479 GWh in 2010. 
•   Reducing CO2 production by more than 2.4 t/year. 
•   Treating and removing 4.6 million t/year of inert waste.  
•   Collecting and treating 150,000 t/year of industrial waste.  
•   Treating and regenerating 67,000 t/year of mineral oils. 
•   Annual removal of more than 5 million tons of solid urban waste. 
•   Annual cleaning of more than 8 million kilometers of streets. 
•   Annual maintenance of more than 60 million m² of green zones. 
 
USW Treatment Technology Number of Facilities Installed Capacity (t/year) Largest Facility (t/year) 
Pre-treatment 42 6,665,574 540,000 
Waste-to-Energy 8 1,883,339 432,000 
Biomethanization 20 1,560,103 140,000 
Composting 52 2,762,180 220,000 
Transfer Plants 81 5,349,626 1,825,000 
Packaging 32 407,022 110,000 
USW waste disposal sites 48 9,846,788 1,900,000 
Degassing waste disposal sites 13 272.64 Hm3 79.44 
 
Role in the Project:  
URBASER will offer its R&D Center  area to install new prototypes or pilot plants which allow the operation and validation of 
innovative technological solutions for the treatment of outlet streams coming from the fermentation process of municipal solid 

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 64 
 
 
wastes, in order to get as much of hi gh-grade valuable products (biopolymers, biomethane, microalgae) and maximize the 
valorisation of the organic fraction of MSW (OFMSW). In particular, URBASER will participate in the anaerobic digestion of 
OFMSW for VFA production and biogas production through methanogenic steps (WP3 leader, WP4), operating its anaerobic 
digester according to the project needs. Furthermore, Urbaser will integrate of VFA, PHA production and microalgae processes.  
In addition to that, URBASER will participate in WP1, WP5, WP6, WP7 and WP8. 
Scientific team:  
PhD. Eduardo Fernández (M). Professional category: Innovation Director  
Education: PhD. Mining Engineer. Work experience: 15-year experience in R&D project management 
Cristina Alvarez Requena (F). Professional category: Responsible for Coordination of R&D Project  
Industrial Engineer, Forestry Engineer and Bachelor in Environmental Sciences: Environmental Engineering. Work experience: 
11-year experience in R&D project management, 4-year experience in environmental research at University. 
PhD. Alexandre Colz Lopes (M). Professional category: R&D Center researcher. Education: PhD. Chemical Engineering 
and Environmental Technology. Work experience: 15-year experience in biological waste (water) treatment research, 
including the design and operation of bioreactors with different biological processes (nitrification/denitrification, H2S removal, 
BTEX removal). 19 publications in ISI journals. 
PhD. Marta Guerrero (F). Professional category: R&D Center researcher. Education: PhD. Chemical Engineer. Work 
experience: 13-year experience in chemical and environmental engineering research, including energy, thermochemical 
conversion of biomass and wastes at bench and pilot scales and minimization of atmospheric pollutants.  
PhD. Gema Ortiz (F). Professional category:  R&D project engineer. Education: PhD. Mining Engineer. Work experience: 8 -
year experience in hydrogeological and CO2 geological storage research at IGME and CIUDEN. 4-year experience in technical 
management and coordination of national and international R&D projects at CIUDEN and URBASER. 
Related publications, patents or products:  
- Alfaro, N., Cano, R., Fdz -Polanco, F., 2014. “Effect of thermal hydrolysis and ultrasounds pre -treatment on foaming in 
anaerobic digester.” Bioresource Technology, 170, pp. 477-482. 
- Method for converting plastic waste into gasoil in a two stage process. Application number: 201100139 Publication number: 
ES2389799B2 Date of grant: May 23, 2013 Publication date o f grant: June 4, 2013 Patent holder: Urbaser S.A. Inventors: 
Serrano Granados, David Pedro; Aguado Alonso, José; Escola Sáez, José María; García Sánchez, Alicia; Briones Gil, Laura 
- Cano, R., Pérez Elvira, S. I., Fdz -Polanco, F., 2015. “Energy feasibility study of sludge pretreatments: A review.” Applied 
Energy, 149, pp. 176-185. 
- Nielfa, A., Cano, R., Fdz-Polanco, M., 2014. “Theoretical methane production generated by the co-digestion of organic fraction 
municipal solid waste and biological sludge.” Biotechnology reports, 5, pp. 14-21. 
- Process and installation for anaerobic treatment of material having high solids concentration. Application number: US 
12/514,721. Publication number: US8163180B2. Publication date of grant: April 24, 2012. Patent holder: Urbaser S.A.. 
Inventor: Jean-Pierre Lotti; Helene Fruteau de Laclos; Claude Saint-Joly 
Related Projects:  
 
Project acronym/description. Scope End 
Year 
Website  
OTERSU (Observatory of Treatment 
Technologies for Municipal Solid Waste with 
Maximum Recovery and Minimum). Funding: 
CENIT Programme by CDTI (Centre for the 
Development of Industrial Technology, 
Spain). Term: 2006-2010. 
The main objective of the project was to analyze 
and study the set of possible technologies for the 
treatment of Municipal Solid Waste (MSW), which 
allows minimizing the waste discharge while 
respecting the environmental legislation. 
2010 - 
TOPBIO (Technologies for optimization of 
biogas production and cleaning). Funding: 
INNPACTO Sub-Programme by Ministry of 
Science and Innovation (Spain). Term: 2010-
2013 
 
The aim of the project was to optimize the 
production of high quality syngas obtained from the 
organic fraction of Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) 
via anaerobic digestion. 
2013 - 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 65 
 
 
INMEDITHE (Increasing and improving 
anaerobic digestion efficiency by thermal 
hydrolysis). Funding: EEA-Grants by CDTI 
(Centre for the Development of Industrial 
Technology, Spain). Term: 2013-2015. 
The objective of this project is to study at pilot scale 
the effect of thermal hydrolysis (TH) on the 
anaerobic biodegradability of the organic fraction 
from municipal solid waste (OFMSW) in order to 
maximize biogas production and minimize the 
amount of final waste in the anaerobic digestion of 
OFMSW. 
2015 - 
COMPOBIOL (Optimization of composting 
processes, bio-drying technology and odour 
abatement). Funding: INNPACTO Sub-
Programme by Ministry of Science and 
Innovation (Spain). Term: 2012-2014. 
The aim of the project was to carry out an 
experimental study at pilot plant scale of the 
composting processes (including bio-drying 
technology and odour abatement) to acquire a 
deeper knowledge. 
2014 - 
3R2020+ (From the Residue to the Resource 
through Recycling) 
Funding: CIEN Programme by CDTI (Centre 
for the Development of Industrial 
Technology, Spain). Term: 2015-2019. 
Its general objective is to develop innovative 
technologies that allow to recover and recycle 
certain waste flows, not actually valorized, to 
transform them into useful and economically viable 
resources. It is found among strategic products and 
raw materials fertilizes, metals, chemical products 
and liquid fuels with market value and application 
on different industrial areas, obtained from 
leachates, galvanized sludge, incineration flying 
and bottom ashes , organic material and plastic 
waste. 
2019 3r2020.c
om 
 
Technical equipment: 
URBASER manages many waste treatment plants, equipped with varied technologies; consequently, it has an experienced 
global vision of the different integrated technologies. At present, URBASER counts on a new Waste Technological Innovation 
R&D Center, called CIAM, focused on testing and studying innovative environmental technologies. This facility, located within 
a big industrial waste treatment plant, consists of different demonstration plants in the field of waste treatment (pre -treatment 
of municipal solid waste, anaerobic digestion of organic matter, composting, solid recovery fuel production and conversion of 
plastic waste into fuel). In addition to the pilot plants, a 250 m 2 testing bench surface at the R&D Center is also available to 
install new prototypes or pilot plants; this testing bench surface is equipped with the necessary utilities like compressed air, 
power supply, water, etc., a leachate collection system and a modern laboratory to analyse samples in order to obtain vital 
information for R&D projects. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 66 
 
 
PARTNER 4 
Name: BIOMASA PENINSULAR S.A. 
Web page: www.bpeninsular.com 
Type: SME 
Country: SPAIN 
 
Brief description of the organization: 
BIOMASA, (VAT A83484782), is a Spanish SME that provides integral and creative services for recycling organic by-products 
based on advanced environmental models. The supplied services and industrial activities cover: 
- Consulting and Engineering focused on integrated planning, reduction and source separation. 
- Transport and Operation of recycling plants. 
- Production and marketing of Compost, Bio-fertilizers and Solid and Recovered fuels. 
The Group obtained in March 2010 a Certification (according to UNE -EN ISO 9001:2008, EN ISO 14001:2004 and OHSAS 
18001:2007), from BMTrada Certification Spain. BIOMASA participates as: 
- - Member of the European Sustainable Phosphorus Platform. http://www.phosphorusplatform.eu/                         
- - Member of Spanish Technology Platform of Plant Biotechnology "BIOVEGEN".  www.biovegen.org 
- - Member of Spanish Water Technology Platform PTEA"  www.plataformaagua.org  
- - Member of Scientific - Technological Park of Córdoba www.rabanales21.com 
- - Participant in the European working groups for the development of New Sludge Directive, New Directive Biological Treatment 
of Bio-Waste / Soil Strategy / End of Waste for Compost and Digestate. 
BIOMASA has been involved in different Spanish and European R&D&i projects related to URBioFIN project: CRAFT 3A -
BIOGAS, ALTENER ASTWOOD, and the rest described in Projects description section. 
 
Role in the Project:  
Role of BIOMASA includes the participation in the following WPs: 1, 4, 5  (leader), 6, 7 and 8, being related to biofertilisers 
development from organic fraction and microalgae extracts, under the form of solid and liquid by-products from down-stream 
units of Fermentation, Anaerobic Digestion and Biomethane upgrading: experimental formu lation and legal and technical 
evaluation, as well as demonstration and dissemination activities. 
Scientific team: 
Dr. Ms. Inés Belén Estrada (F), Doctorate by the University of León. Extraordinary Doctorate Award by University of León, in 
course 2002 -2003. Agricultural Engineer by the University of Santiago de Compostela.  Technical Agricultural Engineer, 
specialty: agricultural holdings by the Un iversity of León. With 13 years of experience. Lab, Environment and Legislation 
manager in BIOMASA. Specializing in environmental research: soil, water, natural resources and waste. Experience in 
environmental impact studies and environmental consulting projects. Participating in different Spanish and European R&D&i 
projects, and in International committees. 
Mr. Jesús García (M), Technical Industrial Engineer by the University of Málaga, with 6 years of experience. Responsible for 
Algodor R&D&i Centre for REFERTIL and CLAMBER projects. Engineering and Projects manager in BIOMASA.  Participating 
in different Spanish and European R &D&i projects. Participation in design and calculation of industrial plants, and machine 
design and schematics for technical literature. 
Dr. Ms. Inmaculada González (F), Doctorate by the University of Córdoba. Degree in Environmental Sciences with 8 years 
of experience. R&D&i manager in BIOMASA. Experience in physical -chemical and biological treatment (aerobic and 
anaerobic) sewage and recovery of byproducts. Experience in studies and environmental consulting projects. Specializing in 
management, coordination and participation in different Spanish and European R&D&i projects. 
Mr. José María Gómez Palacios (M) , Agricultural Engineer. Director in BIOMASA with 28 years of experience. Master in 
Superior Ibero-American studies by the University Complutense of Madrid. (1997). Human Resources Training Program of the 
EU-Japan Centre for Industrial Cooperation (Tokyo, 1996). Participant in EC working groups related to the Soil Thematic 
Strategy (new policies of sludge, biowaste and soils). Speaker at various national and international organic residues and by-
products management conferences: DG Env Stresa 1.999 Workshop, Sanepar Curitiba (Brasil) 1.998, WEFTEC conferences 
1999-2000, IWA Acalpuco 2001 and Moscow 2006 biosolids conferences, Montevideo OSE 2013, Waste Reus e 2015 and 
REFERTIL 2015 Brussels Conferences, etc. Participating in different Spanish and European R&D&i projects with BIOMASA 
PENINSULAR and associated companies. 

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 67 
 
 
Related publications, patents or products: 
- Organizers of Intl´ Conference “Advanced Compost and Biochar processing: solution for economical Phosphorus Recovery” 
in Toledo, September 17-18, 2015. 
- Gómez Palacios, J.M.; Estrada de Luis, I.B., 2015. “R&D&i and agricultural waste and by-products recycling”. 
WASTE Reuse Final Conference. Brussels 12 May 2015. http://www.wastereuse.eu/ 
- Estrada de Luis, I.B.; Gómez Palacios, J.M., 2013. “European Union (EU) End of Waste Regulation: Requirements for Input 
Materials and Compost Quality for Sludge and other Biodegradable Waste”. Journal of Residuals Science & Technology, Vol. 
10, No. 3, pp. 139-146. Date: July 2013. Publication: 1544-8053/13/03 139-08. 2013 DEStech Publications, Inc. 
- Organizers of soilACE I & II, “Intl´ Conference on Soil and Compost Eco-Biology” in 2004 & 2008.  http://www.soilACE.com 
- Gómez Palacios, J.M.; Ruiz de Apodaca, A.; Rebollo, C.; Azcárate, J., 2002. “European policy on biodegradable waste: a 
management perspective”. Water Sci Technol. 2002; 46(10):311-8. 
Related Projects: 
Project acronym/description. Scope End 
Year Website 
2014-2018. TL-BIOFER Project. LIFE13ENVES800: “Nutrients and regenerated 
water recycling in WWTPs through Twin Layer microalgae culture for biofertilisers 
produ tion” Coordinating beneficiary: BIOMASA PENINSULAR S.A. in 
collaboration with the KÖLN UNIVERSI TY, EMPROACSA and BIO -LOGICAL 
SOLUTIONS S.L. Budget BIOMASA: 439.948 €.  
Micr algae, 
Biofertiliser 2018 http://life-
tlbiofer.eu 
March-December 2015. CLAMBER Project Lot 2 Valorisation of municipal waste 
organic fraction research, development and innovation services, for the resources 
recovery of agri -food industrial biomass by innovative pre -commercial public 
procurement in CLMancha Bio-Economy region, co-financed with FEDER funds. 
Budget: 230.578 €. 
MSW 
organic 
fraction, 
Biofertiliser 
2015 
http://clamber
.castillalaman
cha.es/ 
March-December 2015. CLAMBER Project Lot 5 Valorisation  of olive washing 
water, olive pomace, vinasses and high charge agri -industrial water, research, 
development and innovation services, for the resources recovery of agri -food 
industrial biomass by innovative pre -commercial public procurement in 
CLMancha Bio-Economy region. Budget BIOMASA: 253.884 €. 
Biochar, 
Biofertiliser 2015 
 
http://clamber
.castillalaman
cha.es/ 
 
2011-2015. REFERTIL Project . 7º Framework Programme. KBBE.2011.1.2 -0: 
“Improvement of comprehensive bio -waste transformation and nutrient recovery 
treatment processes  for production of combined natural products. “Reducing 
mineral fertilisers and chemicals use in agriculture by recyc ling treated organic 
waste as compost and bio-char products”. Budget BIOMASA: 220.743 €.   
Compost, 
Biochar, 
Biofertiliser 
2015 http://refertil.i
nfo 
2010-2012. CDTI NNTT ABIOAGRIN . Technological Cooperation Project 
between SMEs “Design of New Technologies for Application of new agricultural 
inputs ABIOAGRIN Sustainable Agricultural Production in Andalucía. Consortium: 
AMC CHEMICALS S.L. (Coordinator), LABS & TECHNOLOGICAL SERVICES 
(AGQ), FERTIBERIA S.A. BIOMASA PENINSULAR Budget BIOMASA: 354.602 
€. 
Compost, 
Biofertiliser 2012 
http://www.nn
ttabioagrin.co
m 
 
Technical equipment: 
The main available resource for this project is “R&D&i and Experimental Production Center Algodor”, in Toledo (70 km from 
Madrid), including Composting and Anaerobic Digestion Pilot Plants for organic by -products treatment and production of 
compost and new ly developed bio -products. The installations include 7,000 m 2 of paved yards and 2,800 m 2 of industrial 
buildings, including offices, scale, repair and maintenance building, etc. 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 68 
 
 
Composting pilot plants 
- Pilot plant of 1 tpd capacity with Aerated piles and semi-permeable covers, with own developed monitoring software, with 
open programming parameters. 
- Pilot plant of 1,500 L , 0.1 tpd capacity, able to be used as mixer or for drum composting 
 
 
   
Drum composting pilot module 1,500 L; Composting pilot plant: aerated piles with semi-permeable cover 
 
 
  
Remote control and monitoring for composting pilot plant 
 
 
 
Anaerobic Digestion Pilot Plant 
Pilot plant with 9,000 L digester available for trials, demonstration activities, including feed input materials preparation line and 
mechanical dewatering of digestate. (See below AD Pilot plant besides Sorting line) 
 
 
Reception and sorting MWOF line connected with AD and Composting Pilot Plants 
 
 
 
 
Tipo de control: 
 Control manual 
 Control temporizado 
 Control por tiempo y temperatura 
 Control basado en demanda de oxígeno 
Criterio de higienización: 
 Superar los               ºC durante               horas 
Frecuencia de registro de datos:                         min   
 
 
 
 
ESTADO DE LA PILA Nº ## 
Editar parámetros 
Arrancar proceso 
Consultar gráficos 
Acceder a registro 
Volver a ventana gral. 

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 69 
 
 
Figures from MWOF reception and sorting line 
 
  
  
 
Auxiliary equipment 
  
               Biomass shredder ARJES RAPTOR XL VZ 760D        Doppstadt Screen SM-620 / CATERPILLAR 908H loader 
 
 
 
Infrastructures and auxiliary installations 
 
 
Figures from MSW organic fraction separate collections campaigns 
 

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 70 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
Trucks scale           Concrete Bins and dock for raw materials and reception         Screened compost 
 

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 71 
 
 
PARTNER 5 
Name: University of Valladolid 
Web page: www.uva.es; http://envtech.uva.es;  
http://gastreatment-
microalgaeresearchgroup.blogspot.com.es 
Type: RTO 
Country: SPAIN 
 
Brief description of the organization 
The Environmental Technology Group (EnvTech) from the Department of Chemical Engineering and Environmental 
Technology at the University of Valladolid (UVa) started its research activities in the early 80s in the treatment of industr ial 
wastewaters and biological nutrient removal. Other research lines such as biological gas treatmen t, microalgae -based 
wastewater treatment and biomass valorization were initiated in 2000. Since 1980, the EnvTech has conducted a sustained 
and intense labour in the development of cost -effective technologies for pollution control in both wastewater and of f-gas 
emissions. More than 35 years of expertise in design and operation of wastewater treatment processes, 16 of them related 
to microalgae-based wastewater treatment, biological gas treatment and microalgae valorization, support the capacity of the 
group to conduct the tasks assigned in the URBioFIN project, i.e. biogas upgrading to biomethane in high rate algae ponds 
and subsequent biomass revalorization, biogas desulfurization by biotrickling filtration, removal of siloxanes from raw biogas 
and biogas c onversion into high -added value products. Its research activity has been recognized and financed within the 
frame of public R&D projects from the Spanish Ministry for Science and Education and the EU (42 projects with a total Budget 
of ≈5761000 € in the past 10 years). The research group has also collaborated with several companies aiming at reinforcing 
the mechanisms of knowledge transfer between University and Industry (62 projects with a total Budget of ≈7535000 € in the 
past 10 years). Nowadays, EnvTech is composed of 2 full professors, 8 associate professors, 7 post-docs, 15 PhD students 
and 5 technicians. In addition, the academic and scientific productivity of the group during these past 5 years accounted for 
15 PhD theses presented, 148 JCR articles, 4 patents and 150 contributions to International Congresses. 
 
Role in the Project:  
The EnvTech group will be involved in the upgrading of raw biogas to biomethane in photobioreactors, the selective removal 
of siloxanes from biomethane in two phase partitioning bioreactors, the selective removal of H2S from biogas and its further 
bioconversion into high-added value products such as PHAs. EnvTech will apply its 16 years of R&D experience in the design 
and operation of algal-bacterial photobioreactors to optimize the upgrading potential and maximize the subsequent production 
of biobased products. The group has successfully operated both open and enclosed photobioreactors under indoor and 
outdoor conditions for the treatment of domestic and livestock wastewate rs. Besides, the broad experience of the EnvTech 
group in the operation of low-cost, high-efficiency bioreactors for waste gas treatment will be applied to the selective removal 
of siloxanes and H 2S, and to the bioconversion of the raw biogas to high -added value products. Role of EnvTech includes 
the participation in the following WPs: 1, 4 (leader), 6, 7 and 8. 
Scientific team:  
Dr. Raúl Muñoz  (M), H=31 Dr. Muñoz holds a PhD in Environmental Biotechnology from Lund University (2005). Raúl is 
Associate Professor at the Department of Chemical Engineering and Environmental Technology at UVa. His main fields of 
expertise are wastewater treatment in algal-bacterial photobioreactors and biological gas treatment. Over the past 10 years, 
Raúl has published 124 ISI papers, 22 book chapters, 105 International Conference proceedings and supervised 11 PhD 
theses and 16 Master theses. Raúl has been Principal Investigator in 21 R&D projects and contracts with companies in the 
past 10 years. 
Dr. Silvia Bolado Rodriguez  (F), H=14 PhD in Chemistry at UVa in 1995, and Associate Professor at the Department of 
Chemical Engineering and Environmental Technology at UVa. She has an extensive experience in solid waste pretreatment, 
valorization and separation processes. She has participated in more than 50 R&D public and private projects, coordinating 
20 of them. Nowadays, she is Principal Investigator in 2 research projects on valoriz ation of microalgae biomass grown in 
wastewater. She has more than 70 scientific publications, 37 ISI papers, 9 book chapters, 2 books and 60 International 
Conferences. She has supervised 9 PhD theses.   
Dr. Pedro A. García Encina  (M), H= 27, PhD in Chemistry at UVa in 1985, he has an extensive experience in the 
development of biological nutrient removal processes and the application of molecular tools. In the past years Pedro A. 
García Encina has been principal investigator in 3 National R&D projects in microalgae-based wastewater treatment. Pedro 
is Full Professor at UVa and has published more than 75 ISI papers and supervised 19 PhD students in his research career. 
Pedro has been Principal Investigator in more than 50 R&D public and private projects. 

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 72 
 
 
Dr. Raquel Lebrero (F), H=11, holds a PhD in Chemical Engineering from UVa in 2013 and her field of expertise is biological 
gas treatment with a particular focus on gas-liquid mass transfer phenomena. She is Assistant Professor at the Department 
of Chemical Engineering and Environmental Technology at the University of Valladolid. Raquel has published 28 JCR papers 
and 4 International Book Chapters, supervised 1 PhD Thesis, and performed research stays in the laboratories of Richard 
Stuetz (UNSW Water Research Centre, Sydney), Herman Van Langenhove  (ENVOC Group, Gent University), Eugenio 
Foresti (University of Sao Paolo, Brazil) and Kartik Chandran (Columbia University, EEUU). Raquel has been Principal 
Investigator of 2 R&D projects in biogas  upgrading in photobioreactors and biogas revalorization into high added value 
products, and 4 R&D contracts with companies.  
Dr. Israel Díaz (M), H=7, holds a PhD in Process and Systems Engineering from UVa in 2011 and is specialized in anaerobic 
digestion of waste, particularly in the treatment and upgrading of biogas. He is postdoctoral researcher at the Department of 
Chemical Engineering and Environmental Technology at the University of Valladolid. Israel has published 13 JCR papers, 1 
book chapter, 1 patent and performed research stays under the supervision of Jules van Lier (University of Wageningen, The 
Netherlands) and Luciano M. Queiroz (Federal University of Salvador de Bahia, Brazil). Israel has participated in the scientific 
team of 6 R&D contrac ts with companies developing new technologies for waste valorization through anaerobic digestion 
and bioreactors for biogas upgrading. 
Related publications, patents or products:  
- Toledo A.L., Serejo M, Blanco S, Perez R, Lebrero R, Muñoz R (2016) Photosynthetic biogas upgrading to bio -methane: 
boosting nutrient recovery via biomass productivity control. Algal Research 17: 46-52. 
- Cantera S., Lebrero R., Sadornil L., García-Encina P.A., Muñoz R. (2016) Valorization of CH4 emissions into high-added-
value products: Assessing the production of ectoine coupled with CH4 abatement. Journal of Environmental Management 
182: 160-165. 
- Serejo M, Posadas E, Boncz M, Blanco S, Garcia -Encina P, Muñoz R (2015) Inf luence of biogas flow rate on biomass 
composition during the optimization of biogas upgrading in microalgal -bacterial processes. Environmental Science & 
Technology. 49(5): 3228-3236. 
- Lebrero R., Toledo -Cervantes A., Muñoz R., del Nery V., Foresti E. (201 6) Biogas upgrading from vinasse digesters: a 
comparison between an anoxic biotrickling filter and an algal-bacterial photobioreactor. Journal of Chemical Technology and 
Biotechnology 91: 2488-2495. 
- Muñoz R., Meier L., Diaz I., Jeison D. (2015) A review on the state -of-the-art of physical/chemical and biological 
technologies for biogas upgrading. Reviews in Environmental Science and Biotechnology 14: 727-759. 
Related Projects: 
 
Project acronym/description. Scope End 
Year Website  
Biogas Bioconversion to Commodities and High-
Added Value products: Exploring new strategies 
for biogas valorization 
Production of PHAs from biogas 2019 - 
Energy valorization of solid waste and effluents: 
Smart Green Gas 
Optimization of biogas production, 
upgrading and biomethane 
monitoring 
2018 - 
Biogas purification for injection in natural gas 
grid using symbiotic algal-bacterial processes 
Purification of biogas by algal-
bacterial processes for its injection 
into natural gas grids 
2017 - 
Nutrient recovery from agroindustrial effluents 
via microalgal biomass growth and valorization 
Extraction and purification of 
carbohydrates and proteins from 
microalgae 
2016 - 
Optimization of the simultaneous removal of CO2 
and H2S in Photobioreactors 
Biogas upgrading using algal-
bacterial photobioreactors 2010 - 
Technical equipment: 
- 3 automated photobioreactors (180 L, 180 L and 80 L) 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 73 
 
 
- 2 GC-MS 
- 2 GC-FID + 1 GC ECD 
- 2 GC-TCD 
- 1 TOC-TN analyser 
- 1 Fully equipped Molecular Biology Lab 
- 2 Fully equipped Laboratories for physical chemical characterization  of wastewater 
 
 
 
  
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 74 
 
 
PARTNER 6 
Name: Exergy Ltd (Terminated) 
Web page: http://www.exergy.uk.com/ 
Type: SME 
Country: UNITED 
KINGDOM  
Brief description of the organization:  
Exergy is one of the UK's leading renewable energy companies with the expertise to provide services, across the globe, to 
develop, engineer, construct and operate projects that contribute to our goal of a low carbon, sustainable future. We have been 
in the industry for over 10 years, contributing to the development of the global renewable energy market. We have helped to 
move the sustainable energy debate from the margin to the mainstream. Operating across a range of innovative low -carbon 
energy technologies, our capabilities cover everything from project inception to energy generation and operation. Sustainability 
lies at the core of our values; balancing commercial, environmental and social concerns to address the world’s energy problems 
is what makes us different. 
We are unique in our ability to offer vertically integrated skills in a range of sustainable energy technologies. Exergy can be 
involved at every stage: from project design and development, through planning and financing, engineering and construction 
to operation. Exergy ensures schemes are designed and built to generate energy in the most economical way and with minimal 
environmental impact. 
Exergy provides a range of technical and professional services across the chemical, energy and built environment sector by 
means of a multi -disciplinary team supported by extensive practical experience in the following specialist areas: Feasibilit y 
Assessments that include techno -economic assessments and LCC; Design, Modelling and Scaling up of Chemical and 
Biochemical Processes; Resource Efficiency & Environmental Management; Water Management Strategies; Design and 
Delivery of Resource Efficiency support for SME’s; Development, Monitoring and Measurement of Sustainability Projects; Low 
Carbon footprint Construction Techniques and Life Cycle Assessment. Exergy has a strong work team made up of different 
profiles: chemical and process engineers, mechanical engineers, civil engineers and environmental engineers, amongst other. 
Exergy is also member of SPIRE and BIC. 
 
Role in the Project : Exergy leads the WP6 where the entire urban process will be integrated and optimised through virtual 
simulations as well as the project’s impacts will be assessed (economic, environmental and social) along with the study of al l 
the potential regulatory and legal aspects which might impact on the project outcomes.  Role of Exergy includes also the 
participation in the following WPs: 1, 7 and 8. 
Scientific team:  
Dr. Fernando Centeno, (M): degree in Physics, Master Degree and PhD in Renewable Energies and Energy Efficiency. Mr. 
Centeno has wide experience on the engineering and consultancy field related to t he building construction & energy sector. 
Has been involved in two FP7 coordinations focused on the renewable energy sector. As Head of the R&D Group, he has 
participated in more than 38 international R&D project (i.e. H2020, FP7, IEE, Life+, Eco-innovation, Eureka, Eurostars, among 
others). 
MSc.Eng Jose Luis Molto, (M): holds a master in Chemical Engineering by Rey Juan Carlos University. He has a strong 
background in simulation, optimisation and modelling of chemical and biochemical processes (Aspen HYSYS , Aspen PLUS 
and SuperPro) along with the feasibility and economical assessments of them. He is an active member of the European 
Federation of Chemical Engineers (EFCE) since 2013 and he is associate member of IChemE since 2016.  
MSc.Eng Rocio Roldan, (F): is Chemical Engineer by Complutense University of Madrid. Her expertise area is related to the 
modelling and simulation of chemical and biochemical processes and unitary operations, especially focused on the AspenOne 
software handling and mathematic model ling. She has been involved in projects related to the valorisation of biomass into 
valuable products and related to circular economy. She is an associate member of IChemE. 
MSc.Eng Sreenivaasa R. Pamidi, (M): is a bachelor in Mechanical and Energy Engineer ing from VIT, India and holds a 
master’s degree in MSc and PhD Renewable Energy and Environmental Modelling from University of Dundee, Scotland. He 
has worked on several European research projects which have focussed on his main area of expertise in Energy  Harvesting 
Infrastructure, solar Photovoltaics, solar thermal, Energy Efficiency Optimisation, and Modelling in the Area of Renewable 
Energies. 
Related publications, patents or products:  

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 75 
 
 
- Simulation of chemical pre-treatment process and Optimisation and scale up of the system based on simulation. Liquid and 
gas Fischer -Tropsch fuel production from olive industry waste: fuel from waste. Exergy Ltd, report for the European 
Commission. 2015. 
- Sustainable techno-economic solutions for the agricultural value chain Scale-up and design of an optimised algae process 
for biodiesel and biogas production. Molto Marin, Jose L. Chemical Engineering, Thesis - Madrid, 2015. 
- Scale-up and design of an optimised biomass to liquid process (BtL) for dies el production from agroforestal wastes. Roldan 
Aguayo, Rocio. Chemical Engineering, Thesis. Madrid, 2016 
- Reducing the impact of forest plant production - design of a stand-alone PV-hybrid system for powering an innovative forestry 
incubator. Sreenivaasa R Pamidi, Marco Hernández Velasco. (2014) 
Related Projects:  
 
Technical equipment: 
The main office of Exergy is located in Coventry, United Kingdom, within the Technology Park where around 70 different 
business companies are placed. Exergy utilises industry -leading software for the simulation and optimisation of chem ical 
processes (AspenOne software engineering), along with the specialised software for the measure and evaluation of the 
potential environmental impacts linked to processes and products SimaPro and GaBi. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project acronym/description. Scope End 
Year Website  
INNOBITE – “Transforming urban and 
agricultural residues into high performance 
biomaterials for green construction”. FP7 ENV 
NO. 308465 
Biomaterials for green 
construction 2015 www.innobite.eu 
FFW - “Liquid and gas Fischer-Tropsch fuel 
production from olive industry waste: fuel from 
waste”. FP7 ENV, No. 308733 
Development of an innovative 
process for the production of 
liquid and gas through Fischer-
Tropsh fuel production 
2016 www.fuelfromwaste.eu 
AGROCYCLE - “Sustainable techno-economic 
solutions for the agricultural value chain”. 
H2020 No. 690142 
Development of a sustainable 
techno-economic  2019 -  
AgriMax - “Agri and food waste valorisation co-
ops based on flexible multi -feedstocks 
biorefinery processing technologies for new 
high added value applications” BBI JU – 
VC3.D5 2015 
Development of a biorefinery 
process using multiple agri-food 
feedstocks 
2020 -  
CloseWEEE - “Integrated solutions for pre -
processing electronic equipment, closing the 
loop of post-consumer high-grade plastics, and 
advanced recovery of critical raw materials 
antimony and graphite" . H2020 WASTE No 
641747 
 2018 www.closeweee.eu 
 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 76 
 
 
PARTNER 7 
Name: Novozymes A/S 
Web page: www.novozymes.com 
Type: Large 
Industry Country: 
Denmark  
Brief description of the organization:  
Novozymes is a world leader in bio-innovation and specialised in industrial enzymes and microorganisms. NZ already markets 
over 700 biotechnology products in 130 countries.  The enzyme production leaves NZ with a global enzyme market share of 
48% (2015). Around 14% of NZ revenue is spent on research and development, and it currently holds almost 7,000 granted or 
pending patents, which indicate the possibilities when nature and technology join forces. As a leading biotech company, NZ 
believes that by using industrial biotechnology thousands of everyday products can potentially be re -engineered to deliver 
enhanced sustainability performance, at no extra cost. Over the past 15 years, the company has invested heavily in developing 
superior enzyme products to enable the biomass and MSW to bioethanol/biogas industry as well as the generation of simple 
sugars from lignocellulose for the bio -production of more advanced products. Novozymes is today supplying enzymes to the 
majority of existing lignocellulosic bio-ethanol plants. 
 
Role in the Project:  
Novozymes will sample enzyme products optimized for degradation of MSW and provide recommendations for optimization of 
enzyme application in the Perseo Bioethanol® process to enable cost -efficient conversion of MSW to sugars for further 
downstream processing into higher-value products. Role of Novozymes includes the participation in the following WPs:  1, 2, 
6, 7 and 8. 
Scientific team:  
Dr. Henrik Bangsø Nielsen (M), Research Scientist, Dept. Of Biomass Technology EU, Novozymes A/S. Master of Science 
in Biology at Copenhagen University and PhD in Anaerobic Digestion at Technical University (DTU). Subsequently, Post Doc 
and Scientist at DTU Environment and DTU The National Laboratory for Sustainable Energy. Several peer reviewed publication 
within the bioenergy area. 5 years of experience as Research Scientist developing enzyme products for c onversion of waste 
products to bioenergy (biogas, bioethanol and biodiesel). 
Dr. Anne Stenbæk (F), Dept. Manager, Dept. Of Biomass Technology EU, Novozymes A/S. PhD in Plant Biotechnology from 
Copenhagen University. 3 years of experience as Research Scientist at Novozymes, developing enzyme products for Biomass 
Conversion processes as well as participation in various research projects in collaboration with academia and 2G bioethanol 
industry players.  
Related publications, patents or products: None 
Related Projects:  
 
Technical equipment: 
Pilot and full-scale production facilities for production of enzymes. 
Project acronym/description. Scope End 
Year Website  
BioValue SPIR (supported by 
Innovation Fund Denmark) 
High-value biobased products from 
biomass 2018 www.biovalue.dk 
Biomass for the 21st century 
(supported by the Danish National 
Advanced Technology Foundation). 
Conversion of 2G biomass into sugar-
derived chemicals and a lignin-based 
maritime fuel. 
2017 http://b21st.ku.dk/ 
  
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 77 
 
 
PARTNER 8 
Name: G.I. Dynamics B.V. (Terminated) 
Web page: www.gidynamics.nl 
Type: SME 
Country: The 
Netherlands  
Brief description of the organization: 
G.I. Dynamics is an independent and international leading technology and service providing organization in certain niche 
Petrochemical/Biochemical/gas processing and Waste separation processes. Along with its partners it focuses on the 
development and implementation of projects worldwide.  
GID in Europe offers technology portfolio with respect to Petrochemicals and (Bio-)Refineries as follows: 
• Bio-Ethanol 
• Ethanol to Ethylene 
• Ethylene Oxide / Mono Ethylene Glycol 
• Maleic Anhydride 
• Caprolactam 
• As technology and services provider GID extends its role to full project development including (Pre-) Feasibility, FEED 
- Front End Engineering Design, Full Project Execution, Feedstock & Offtake Support. 
 
 
Bio-Refining Solutions of GI Dynamics 
 
Role in the Project:  
G.I. Dynamics aims to be partner in the p roject by designing and building a pilot plant downstream of the produced ethanol. 
The pilot plant will produce Ethylene up to Polyethylene, with a goal to validate that the produced ethanol is suitable for 
sustainable ethylene derivative chemicals. Role of G.I. Dynamics includes the participation in the following WPs: 1, 2, 5, 6, 7 
and 8. 
GID team:  
Wim van der Zande (M), Founder and Managing Director of G.I. Dynamics, with more than 25 years of experience in managing 
complex organizations throughout Europe, the USA, the Middle East and Asia. He has an extensive background in the 
engineering contracting business, specifically in the development of chemical production facilities. His functions in recent years 
include those of COO, CEO, President and currently holds board member-ships at several companies/ organizations with over 
1.000 employees total. 
Mr. Brian Ozero  (M), Technology director for Ethanol to Ethylene and EO/ EG. He has author ed many publications and 
encyclopedia chapters on EO/EG, invented & patented process improvements and prepared process design packages for 
more than fifteen EO/EG plants. He was a key contributor to the development of improved designs of large hot oil -cooled 
reactors and the basic design of SD's Boiling Water reactors as Director of Technology and Senior Process Manager till 1985. 
Before SD Mr. Ozero worked with Shell. Mr. Ozero is inventor of several important patents and design aspects of EO / MEG 
technology being practiced today world wide. 

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 78 
 
 
Mr. A. S. Walia (M) has over 25 years experience in Fertilizer and Petrochemical Industry. He has worked in four EO/EG plants 
from project execution to plant start -up and operations in India, Iran, Bulgaria, and Mexico . At India Glycol and SMDL (RIL), 
Mr. Walia was responsible for Ethanol to EO/MEG projects from Concept to commissioning. 
Mr. Ranbir Bhatia (M), an IIT chemical engineer has over 30 year experience with over 10 years at India Glycols and Reliance 
industries EO/MEG operations, site management, training and troubleshooting and project management. He is Petron’s project 
director. 
Mr. Dennis Chafiâ (M), an Organic Chemist, working within G.I. Dynamics as Business Development Manager and responsible 
with the Bio-Refinery projects’ development in Europe and the integration with upstream and downstream processes. 
Ms Tandra Das (F), Tech in process engineering from IIT, Delhi, working as BDM(technology expert) in GID, supporting in 
technical activities in various petrochemical, Bio refinery and other energy related projects. In the past 30 years she was 
involved in thermal and proces s planning, designing activities in Iron & steel Industry and also Petro chemical related 
International Design Engineering Companies. 
Related publications, patents or products: 
None 
Related Projects:  
Year Client Location Plant Capacity 
2014 to 2017 (Exp.) Confidential (On-going Project)  Confidential  100KTA/250 KTA 
2014 Lotte Chemicals  South Korea 300 KTA 
2011 Jilin Zhongxin Chemical Group Co.  China 90 KTA 
2010 Heyang Alcohol Co. China 90 KTA 
2010 Greencol(Toyota) Taiwan 100 KTA 
2005 Reliance India 70 KTA 
1995 Oswal Petrochemical India 58 KTA 
1994 Uniglobe Glycol India 40 KTA 
1991 SM Dyechem India 56 KTA 
 
Technical equipment: 
- Ethanol purification section.(optional) 
- Ethanol Reaction and Heat recovery sections 
- Quench, Water Stripping & Compression. 
- Ethylene wash drying 
- Ethylene purification (optional) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 79 
 
 
PARTNER 9 
Name: Wageningen University & Research 
Web page: http://www.wur.nl/es.htm 
Type: RTO 
Country: The 
Netherlands 
 
 
Brief description of the organization:  
Wageningen University & Research (Wageningen UR) is the umbrella organization comprising legal entities Wageningen 
University and Stichting Wageningen Research. The partner entity is Wageningen Research. Wageningen UR explores the 
potential of nature to improve the quality of life. With approximately 30 locations around the world, 6,000 staff members and 
9,000 students, Wageningen UR is a world leader in the biobased economy domain. An integral way of working and 
cooperation between the exact sciences and t he technological and social disciplines are the key to its approach. 
Wageningen UR partners in developing chemicals, materials, fuels & energy that use biomass instead of fossil resources 
and in the creation and production of healthy and tasty food. Our in -depth knowledge on developing truly sustainable 
biomass valorisation chains (from raw materials through refining to marketable end -products) for food and non -food 
applications drives our approach. Together with our customers, Wageningen UR develops production processes, biobased 
materials, and full sustainable biomass valorisation strategies that will transform the current economy into a sustainable 
bioeconomy. With innovative technologies, Wageningen UR turns both primary crops and residues from the food industry, 
agriculture and natural infrastructure into marketable products and energy: human food, animal feed, chemicals, materials, 
fuels, power and heat. The Institute Food & Biobased Research (FBR) will represent Wageningen Research in this project 
with its fermentation and microalgae expertise in microbial production of medium and long-chain-length (MCFA/LCFA) fatty 
acids and medium chain length (mcl) PHA’s and development of industrial applications for these components. 
Role in the Project: 
Wageningen UR will establish fermentation processes using Cryptococcus sp. for long-chain fatty acid (LCFA) based on the 
existing volatile fatty acid (VFA) stream and will establish a fermentation process for medium -chain length poly -hydroxy 
alkanoate (mcl-PHA) production using the VFA’s and ethanol as substrates and pure cultures of Pseudomonas putida as 
production organism. Role of Wageningen UR includes the participation in WPs 1, 3, 5, 6, 7 and 8. 
Scientific team:  
Dr. Ana Lopez Contreras (F) is a senior scientist at Wageningen Research. She is an expert on the production of fuels and 
chemicals by fermentation of biomass resources and has participated and directed at FBR -WR several projects on 
bioalcohol production, including Isobutanol Platform Rotterdam (IBPR, 2012 -2015), BIOCORE (2010 -2014) and 
SEABIOPLAS (2013 -2015), and several Dutch national projects (TKI - Small scale biorefinery 2014 -2016). She has 
published >20 peer-reviewed scientific articles, 3 book chapters and many reports on biotechnology for fuel and chemical 
production, and has successfully directed 3 PhD thesis and currently supervises 2 PhD students. She is a regular reviewer 
for high impact factor journals in her field. 
Prof. Dr. Jeroen Hugenholtz ( M) is a senior scientist and expertise leader at Wageningen Research. He is an expert in 
(food) fermentation and microbial physiology, especially of anaerobic microorganisms and has been active for over 30 years 
in applied research and industrial R&I (Dutch dairy industry, Coca -Cola, Corbion/Purac) in the area of food and ingredient 
production. He has coordinated and participated in many Dutch and European Public Private Partnerships such as the 
Kluyver Centre, the Wageningen Centre for Food Sciences, TI Food & Nutrition, NutraCells, SysMO, etc. He has published 
over 200 peer-reviewed papers and is author of 25 patents in the area of fermentation. He also holds a part -time chair in 
Industrial Molecular Microbiology at the University of Amsterdam.  
Dr. Frits de Wolf (M) is a senior scientist, project leader, and project acquisition lead at Wageningen Research. He is an 
expert in biophysical chemistry and microbial production of proteins and biopolyme rs including PHA, with additional 
backgrounds in neurophysiology, photosynthesis research and biomembrane biophysics. He has been active for more than 
27 years in applied research, part of which as manager of a group of 30 people, and has acquired and led numerous 
research projects, either entirely funded by industrial clients (including projects amounting to several M€), or with public 
cofunding from national funds or the EU. In addition, he participated in fundamentally scientific projects including an ER C 
Advanced Grant 267254 (BioMate). He has published more than 75 papers in peer -reviewed high- or top-rating journals 
(H27) and 9 patent applications. He co-supervised 14 PhD students. 
 
Related publications, patents or products:  

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 80 
 
 
- López-Contreras, A. M., Claassen, P. A. M., Mooibroek, A. and de Vos, W. M., 2000. “Utilisation of saccharides in extruded 
domestic organic waste by Clostridium acetobutylicum ATCC 824 to produce acetone, butanol and ethanol”. Appl Microbiol 
Biotechnol. 54, 162-16 
- Collas, F., Marchal, R., Clement, B., López-Contreras, A. M. and Claassen, P. A. M., 2014. “Production of isopropanol by 
improved recombinant strains”. (EP2766332 A1) 
- Romano, A., Van der Plas, LHW., Eggink, G., Mooibroek, H., 2005. “Expression of poly-3-(R)-hydroxyalkanoate (PHA) 
polymerase and acyl -CoA-transacylase in plast ids of transgenic potato leads to the synthesis of a hydrophobic polymer, 
presumably medium-chain-length PHAs”. Planta, 2005, 220: 455-464 
- De Jaeger, L., Verbeek, R.E.M., Draaisma, R.B., Martens, D.E., Springer, J., Eggink, G., and Wijffels, R.H., 2014. “Superior 
triacylglycerol (TAG) accumulation in starchless mutants of Scenedesmus obliquus : (I) mutant generation and 
characterization”. Biotechnology for Biofuels 2014, 7:69 
- Hugenholtz J., 2013. “Traditional biotechnology for new foods and beverages”. Curr Opin Biotechnol. 2013 Apr; 24(2):155-
9. doi: 10.1016/j.copbio.2013.01.001. Epub 2013 Feb 8. Review. 
- Werten, M. W. T., Eggink, G., Cohen Stuart, M. A. & de Wolf, F. A., 2019.  “Production of protein-based polymers in Pichia 
pastoris”.. Biotechnology Advances 37 (5), 642-666, DOI: 10.1016/j.biotechadv.2019.03.012. 
- Hernandez-Garcia, A, Kraft, D. J., Janssen, A. F. J., Bomans, P. H.H., Sommerdijk, N. A. J. M., Thies -Weesie, D. M. E., 
Favretto, M. E., Brock, R., de Wolf, F. A., Werten, M. W. T., van der Schoot, P., Cohen Stuart, M. & de Vries, R., 2014. 
“Design and self-assembly of simple coat proteins for artificial viruses”. Nature Nanotechnol. 9 (9, sept 2014), 698-702, DOI: 
10.1038/nnano.2014.169. Published online 24 August 2014 
 
Related Projects:  
 
Technical equipment: 
- 18 bench-top research fermenters with automated off-gas analysis, including a fermenter set-up suitable for using syngas 
as a substrate. 
– 15-, 100- and 1000-L fermentation equipment 
- downstream processing equipment including continuous centrifugation, cross-flow filtration, etc. 
- mini- and pilot-plant extruder for biomaterials, anaerobic fermenters   
- WR-FBR has excellent facilities and fully equipped laboratories for fermentation, molecular biology, (bio -) chemical 
conversions and polymerisations at a range of scales (i.e. from lab scale to pilot and semi -industrial scale). It has parallel 
screening equipment for chemo -catalytic conversion of biomass into chemicals as well as parallel reactor systems for 
biocatalytic and chemical reactions. WR-FBR has analytical facilities and methods that are relevant for this project (i.e. for 
Project acronym/description. Scope End 
Year Website  
Biocore. Industrial feasibility of a biorefinery concept 
for cereal by-products (wheat straw), forestry residues 
and short rotation woody crops 
Biorefinery of lignocellulose 
from agricultural residues 2014 www.biocore-
europe.org 
Seabioplas. Seabioplas proposes the use of 
seaweeds to produce the biodegradable and 
biobased plastic, PolyLactic Acid (PLA)  
Plastics from seaweed 2015 www.seabioplas.
eu 
MSWBH. Conversion of MSW into bioenergy (butanol 
and H2) using fermentation technology MSW to biofuels 2018 
http://eranetbestf.
net/two/wp-
content/ 
Splash. Using green microalgae for sustainable 
production of biopolymers 
Longchain fatty acids from 
algae 2017 www.eu-
splash.eu 
TKI-AF-PHA. Biorefinery of agricultural waste stream 
from SME’s to PHA’s and their application 
PHA production and 
application from agricultural 
rest streams and WWT  
2017 
http://www.kleinsc
haligebioraffinage
.nl/nl/kbr/onderwe
rpen/phas.htm 
  
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 81 
 
 
the characterisation of biomass, chemicals and materials) like FPLC, electrophoresis, HPLC, GC -MS, GPC, FT-IR, NMR, 
MALDI-TOF-MS, X-Ray, DSC, TG, etc., as well as facilities for the processing and characterisation of polymers. 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 82 
 
 
PARTNER 10 
Name: Centro de Investigaciones 
Energéticas Medioambientales y 
Tecnológicas 
Web page: www.ciemat.es 
Type: RTO 
Country: SPAIN 
 
 
Brief description of the organization:  
CIEMAT (Centro de Investigaciones Energéticas, Medioambientales y Tecnológicas) is a Public Research Institution 
depending on the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness. Main objectives of CIEMAT are to promote and 
execute research,  innovation and technical development in the energy sector. CIEMAT research is conducted in 
cooperation with other institutions and organisations in joint R&D&I projects, providing specialized technical services, 
education and training. Ciemat´s employees are around 1,326 people, technologically and geographically diversified in 
several research Centres in Spain, with central offices and a great part of the facilities located in Madrid. 
The Biofuels Unit is attached to the Renewable Energies Department of C IEMAT, whose and the main objective is to 
perform R&D projects in the renewable energies area, both in resources evaluation and conversion technology 
development. The Biofuels Unit performs R&D projects in the area of bioconversion processes to transform lignocellulosic 
biomass into bioproducts and biofuels such as bioethanol, by means of efficient and low cost biotechnological routes, 
facilitating that these processes can be adopted by industry. The team is composed of scientists such as analytic chemists, 
biochemists, and microbiologists, with specialization in the different areas involved in the biotechnological conversion of 
lignocellulose into bioproducts and bioethanol. 
In the last years, significant advances in the different steps of the conversion process, i.e., pretreatment, enzymatic 
hydrolysis, and yeast fermentation have been attained, based on large research activity on different lignocellulosic 
materials. It hasTh ose advances allowed the team addressing the use of lignocellulose in a wider approach in order to 
obtain a sugar platform and valuable streams for the production of a variety of bioproduct/biofuels, within the biorefinery 
concept. The experience of the group members is shown by the publications and granted projects achieved. 
 
Role in the Project: 
CIEMAT will be focused on adapting/improving the PERSEO bioethanol production process to the new feedstock by 
optimizing pretreatment, enzymatic hydrolysis and fermentation steps. Apart from sugar recovery and ethanol yield, energy 
efficiency ratio, mass balance and toxic compounds generation will be used for the estimation of the optimized parameters. 
CIEMAT will also assist IMECAL in the analysis of the fractions generated in the demo trials. Role of CIEMAT includes the 
participation in WPs 1, 2, 5, 6, 7 and 8. 
Scientific team:  
Dr. Mercedes Ballesteros (F) is Head of the Biofuels Unit at CIEMAT since 2000. She is Ph.D. in Biology by the Autonoma 
University and Master in Biotechnology by Complutense University of Madrid and has more than 30 years’ experience in 
the field of biomass utilization by biological processes for energy purposes, mainly in developing technologies to produce 
bioethanol from lignocellulosic biomass. She has authored about 90 papers and 5 chapters in technical books and is co -
author of 3 patents. 
Dr. Ignacio Ballesteros (M) is a Senior Researcher at the Biofuels Unit of CIEMATand obtained his PhD degree in Biology 
at the University of Alcalá de Henares in 2000. He has large expertise in biological processes for biomass valorization in 
the field of enzymatic hydrolysis and fermentation as well as in biomass pre-treatment, developinghis entire research career 
within the Department of Energy's Renewable Energy Unit atCIEMAT. He is co -author of 35 scientific papers and co -
inventor of 2 patents. 
Dr. José Miguel Oliva Domínguez  (M), S enior Researcher at Biofuels Unit of Ciemat. He has a PhD in Biology by 
University Complutense of Madrid. His main activity is focused on the production of second generation bioethanol from 
lignocellulosic biomass. He has a broad experience in all steps involved in the ethanol production process, mainly in steam 
explosion pretreatment, enzymatic hydrolysis and simultaneous saccharification and fermentation process using 
thermotolerant yeasts. He has published more than 30 papers in SCI journals, numerous  conference contributions and is 
coauthorof 3 patents. He has participated in numerous National and International projects of R&D. He has also 
cosupervised 1 PhD and 3 Master Thesis.  

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 83 
 
 
Related publications, patents or products:  
- - Duque, P. Manzanares, I. Ballesteros, M.J. Negro, J.M. Oliva, A. Gonzales, M. Ballesteros, 2014. “Sugar production from 
barley straw biomass pretreated by combined alkali and enzymatic extrusion”. Bioresource Technology  (2014) 158, 
262:268 
- - Manzanares P, Negro MJ, Oliva JM, Saéz F, Ballesteros I., Ballesteros M., Cara C., Castro E, Ruíz E., 2011. “Different 
process configurations for bioethanol production from pretreated olive pruning biomass”. Journal of Chemical Technology 
and Biotechnology, 86 (6), pp. 881887. 
- - M. Cardoso Coimbra, A. Duque, F. Sáez, P. Manzanares, C.H. García -Cruz, M. Ballesteros, 2016. “Sugar production 
from wheat straw biomass by alkaline extrusion and enzymatic hydrolysis”. Renewable Energy. 86 (2016) 1060-1068 
- - Alvira P, Tomás Pejó, E, Ballesteros M, Negro MJ., 2010. “Pretreatment technologies for an efficient bioethanol production 
process based on enzymatic hydrolysis: A review”. Bioresource Technology, 101 (13), 48514861. 
- - Ballesteros M, Sáez F, Ballesteros I, Manzanares P, Negro MJ, Mar tínez JM, Castañeda R, Oliva JM., 2010. “Ethanol 
Production from the Organic Fraction Obtained After Thermal Pretreatment of Municipal Solid Waste”. Applied Biochemistry 
and Biotechnology, (2010), 161 (1): 423431. 
Related Project: 
Project acronym/descrip-tion. Scope End Year Website  
BABETHANOL. Collaborative research 
project. Project focused on a more 
sustainable solution for the production of 2nd 
generation ethanol through extrusion of 
lignocellulosic residues. 7FP (2009-2013) 
Innovative transformation process at pilot 
plant scale for a more sustainable 
development and production of 
lignocellulosic ethanol. 
2013 www.babetha
nol.com 
BABETREAL5. Project focused on the 
development of an alternative solution for 
the production of second generation ethanol 
based on smaller industrial scale. Horizon 
2020 Programme. Duration: 2016-2020 
New technology and strategy for a large 
and sustainable deployment of second 
generation biofuel in rural areas. Lab to 
pilot scale research. 
2020 www.babet-
real5.eu 
Proethanol2G. Research activities 
concentrated in feedstock pre-treatment, 
conversion technologies to second 
generation (2G) bioethanol, low-temperature 
distillation, conversion technologies for 
electricity and other added-value materials 
and full process integration and 
sustainability assessment. EU-Brazil 
Collaborative project. Duration 2009-2014. 
Effective integration and development of 
advanced technologies through the 
combined use of Biology and Engineering 
for the production of 2G bioethanol, from 
the most representatives European (wheat 
straw) and Brazilian (sugarcane bagasse 
and straw) feedstocks 
2014 www.proetha
nol2g.org 
SMBIO. The project studies the technical-
economic and environmental viability of 
small-scale integrated biorefinery units 
capable of processing different kinds of 
biomass produced in short radius 
catchments rural and small urban areas, 
both in Europe and in CELAC. 
ELAC20147BEE-0249. Duration 2015-2018. 
Development of a highly integrated 
biorefinery concept by incorporating 
individual processes that synergistically 
converts different biomass feedstocks into 
power, biofuels and value-added 
chemicals. 4 different rural/urban small-
scale biorefineries will be simulated and 
modeled under proper and real conditions. 
2020 www.smibio.n
et 
CLAMBER. Participation in the project 
focused on supporting the strategic sector of 
bioeconomy in Castilla-La Mancha region. 
Regional. Goverment of Castilla-La Mancha 
with EU-Fonds. Duration 2015 
To create a technologically advanced 
biorefinery pilot plant that allows the 
research on production of innovative 
bioproducts 
2015 
www.clamber.
castillalamanc
ha.es 
 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 84 
 
 
Technical equipment:  
- Pilot Plants for lignocellulose pretreatment(Liquid Hot Water, Steam Explosion and Extrusion) 
- Bioreactors for enzymatic hydrolysis at low and high consistency 
- Bioreactors from 1 to 30 L capacity 
- Microbiology and biotechnology laboratory, equipped with laminar flow cabins, orbital shakers, pH meters, autoclaves, 
and lab fermenters (1, 2 and 30 L). 
- Analytic laboratory, equipped with UV -VIS spectrophotometers, gas chromatography, liquid chromatography, mass 
spectrometer, HPLC-SEC oligosaccharide purification system, HPAEC-PAD liquid chromatography and TG/DTA. 
 
 
  
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 85 
 
 
PARTNER 11 
Name: Visum Ltd. (Terminated) 
Web page: www.seeingnewdata.com 
Type: SME 
Country: Ireland  
Brief description of the organization:  
VISUM is an optical engineering company from Dublin that specializes in the development and commercialization of Near 
Infrared Spectroscopy (NIRS) -based portable and inline analyzers and measurement systems for process monitoring and 
quality control applications in the food, pharmaceutical and chemical applications. The company was established in 2014 and 
currently employs 9 staff from its facilities in Nexus UCD (technology park at the University College Dublin campus). In 2016 , 
the company launched the VISUMPalm (a handheld NIR measurement instrument) and has secured first sales. An integration 
platform (VisumNIR) for the inline version is currently under development in cooperation with early adopter clients from the 
food processing industry (dairy, meat and olive oil) and pharmaceutical industries. VISUM Ltd. is an SME Champion-awarded 
a Phase 1 and a subsequent Phase 2 Grant under H2020’s SME Instrument. 
Role in the Project:  
VISUM will participate in WP2 where they will test novel advanced sensors for mo nitoring selected process parameters and 
will integrate them at plant level together with a bespoke control system. They will also collaborate in the study of the relevant 
parameters to be analysed in order to select the most suitable sensor technologies.  
VISUM will also develop data mining tools to produce relevant decision support tools for optimally controlling production based 
on relevant process data.  
VISUM will also participate in WP1, supporting the work on preliminary actions for biorefinery design which will feed into WP2.  
VISUM will also take part in WP6, in the environmental, economic and regulatory assessments from the monitoring at plant 
scale point of view and will participate in WP7 by actively engaging in exploitation and d issemination tasks. Role of VISUM  
includes the participation in WPs 5 and 8. 
Scientific team:  
DR. TIMOTHY KEHOE (MALE) PhD in Engineering, University College Cork, Ireland - developed an IR photometric 
measurement system for thermal diffusivity in anisotropic materials.  Masters in Optoelectronics, Queens University Belfast. 
Designed an Echelle spectrometer while based at An dor Technology Ltd.  Worked at Tyndall National Institute, Cork, and 
Catalan Institute of Nanotechnology, Barcelona, developing diffractive optical and acousto -optical metrology techniques for 
nanotechnology applications, in particular for characterision of nanoscale structures fabricated by nanoimprint lithography and 
directed self-assembly. Other research activities: quantification of ordering in self -assembled structures by image analysis 
techniques and optical sensors using hydrogel materials. Tim is the VISUM Palm Product Manager, as well as the Technical 
Lead at VISUM Ltd. and he brings vast optical integration and device instrumentation expertise.  
DR. SEVERINE PHILIPPE (FEMALE)  graduated with a 1st class Hons. B.Sc. in Applied Sciences (Physics and Ph ysics 
Technology) from Dublin Institute of Technology, Ireland, in 2002 and received her PhD in Physics from Trinity College Dublin 
in 2007, for the study of polarisation effects in semiconductor optical amplifiers (SOA). She went on to work on the development 
and characterization of low noise SOAs, as well as THz generation by multimode lasers and their detection using four wave 
mixing in SOA, both in the Semiconductor Photonics Group, Trinity College Dublin, and the School of Electronic Engineering, 
Dublin City University. She previously worked as a R&D technician for the plastics industry and in quality control for electronic 
appliances. She joined VISUM in 2014 as an optical engineer and is currently involved in projects including various microscopy 
techniques, planar waveguide technologies and MIR spectroscopy.  
NIKOLINA MIKULCIC (Female) User Interface Designer. Nikolina comes from web design and development background with 
more than 15 years of experience in this field and she is an expert on UI/UX des ign strategy and front -end development 
(CSS/HTML). She studied graphic design and she started to learn web design due to her deeply interested for digital world. 
Since joining VISUM in September 2016, she has been creating a new User Interface for the VISU M product lines. Prior to 
VISUM, she has an extensive experience in the online world, having worked in companies such as EuroArt93 – digital agency, 

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 86 
 
 
BlueBOX IT, Biroval. She also was a founder of design studio In Love With Blue and she worked as Project Ma nager, UI/UX 
designer and front-end developer. She was leader numerous digital projects for different clients as Erste Bank, Unicredit Bank, 
Telenor Bank, Komb Bank, ZAMP etc. 
CHRIS DERMODY (Male) Software Developer. Bachelor’s degree in Product Design from Dublin Institute of Technology. Chris 
excels in creative problem -solving, using the latest technologies to transform ideas into real opportunities that provide 
exponential value to business operations. With a keen eye for user experience, Chris  builds robust, responsive applications 
that stand the test of time. Since joining VISUM, Chris has been hard at work developing both front and backend features that 
push the VISUM product lines forward. Prior to VISUM, Chris enjoyed working across the ful l spectrum of business, founding 
startups and overseeing product development throughout the lifecycle of many successful businesses. 
EKAITZ HERNANDEZ TROYAS (Male) Fullstack Developer at VISUM. Bachelor Degree in Computing Science (5 years). 
Ekaitz comes f rom startup background focusing in web developing. He has 4 years of experience in the web industry. He 
started to work in Dublin for a small startup related with geolocation industry. He had the opportunity to create his own startup 
related with the cosmetic industry. This experience has given him the opportunity to learn cutting edge technologies as well to 
learn other facets of a company like business development or marketing. Also he worked as a freelancer implementing solutions 
with the Squarespace CMS. Ekaitz always wants to face new challenges and learn new things that are out his core competency. 
MÉABH GARRICK (Female) Optical Engineer. M.Sc Photonics, Friedrich Schiller Universität, Jena, Germany,  B.Sc Physics 
with Medical Physics, National University of Ireland, Galway she worked as a research scientist at the Fraunhofer IOF in Jena, 
Germany after completing my Master Thesis at the institute. I specialised in the area of spectrally resolved laser -induced 
damage testing using a high-power tunable OPO laser system as well as angle resolved scattering (ARS) from surfaces and 
the unique combination of both techniques. My work was presented at the OSA Interference Coatings conference (June 2016). 
She speaks, German (and English). Motivated, team -orientated person with a flair for problem solving. She was awarded a 
scholarship to study at the Abbe School of Photonics, Friedrich Schiller Universität, Jena where she spent almost four years. 
Related publications, patents or products:  
1. Development and commercialisation of the VISUM instruments- NIR spectroscopy devices- in-pipe, handheld  
2. Publication in relation to Innovation Management: O. Mc Nerney, A. Stachowicz, P. Czuprynski, E. Philpott, D. Kolman, D. 
Martin, E. Herrmann (2010). St rategic Guide to Successful Use and Dissemination of the Results of Research and 
Development Projects. 1st edition, Steinbeis-Edition Stuttgart 2010. ISBN 978-3-941417-27-4 
3. On 08/02/2016, VISUM was awarded the Seal of Excellence form the European Commission 
Related Projects: 
1. PREVIEW- PREdictiVe system to recommend Injection mold sEtup in Wireless sensor networks. (Grant Agreement number: 
636892). VISUM Ltd. is responsible for the development of the Data Acquisition System and in in developing the Signal 
Conditioning, its integration with the ARM main board, as well as implementing a prototype. 
2. Phase 1 SME Instrument: An IR-spectroscopy-based platform for the rapid integration and customisation of affordable, real-
time monitoring solutions for the food and pharmaceutical industry (Grant Agreement number: 684767). 
3.. Phase 2 SME Instrument: Cloud-enabled IR spectroscopy platform for the rapid integration and customisation of affordable, 
real-time chemical monitoring solutions for food and pharmaceutical industries (Grant Agreement number: 731043) 
4. Development of a portable LIDAR device for the detection of pesticides for the University of Lerida in Spain (B2B contract) 
5. Development of a NIR device for at-line measurement of quality of oil in industrial frying equipment for bakery products (B2B 
contract). 
Technical equipment: 
Spectroscopic Laboratory: equipped with several instruments, namely, an FTIR-ATR (Interspectrum), two UV-VIS (PerkinElmer 
and Ocean Optics), one Extended -SWIR (StellarNet) and one NIR (Mightex) spectrophotometers as well as a SWIR 
Hyperspectral imager (Specim -Xenics). The associated staff are trained and skilled in chemometrics modelling by using a 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 87 
 
 
commercial suite (SOLO+MIA from Eigenvector) as well as ad hoc non -commercial chemometric tools (Matlab and Python 
toolboxes).  
Electronics, mechanical and optical workshops: equipped with up -to-date hardware and tools: signal generators, wide band 
oscilloscopes, PCB de sign [Altium] and building tools, development kits for programming microcontrollers, CNC -milling 
machines for electronic and mechanical prototyping, and CAD software [SolidWorks], among others. ZEEMAX software for the 
design of optical systems and design setup by means of advanced optical components and facilities (optical tables, windows, 
lenses, lasers and light sources and related “opticalware”). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 88 
 
 
PARTNER 12 
Name: NaturePlast 
Web page: http://www.natureplast.eu/ 
Type: SME 
Country: 
FRANCE 
 
Brief description of the organization: 
Natureplast Company was founded in December 2006 and is specialized in supporting bioplastics applications development 
through its activities: 
• Raw materials distribution: hundreds of different references of biobased and / or biodegradable materials (PLA, PHAs, 
PBS, starch based materials, etc.) available with worldwide network. 
• Services such as project engineering, technical support, technical survey, training, etc.  
• And Research & Development through its 100% owned daughter company Biopolynov: our compounding facility allows 
us to develop and produce compounds with improved properties depending of our customers and applications needs. 
The company’s works usually concerns improving mechanical, processing or thermal properties through the use of several 
raw materials, additives, natural fibers, nanofillers or by-products (or wastes) from different industries.  
In summary, the goal is to help industry to put bioplastics end -products into the market through our access to raw materials 
and our capacity to develop specific compounds with improved properties. 
 
Natureplast and Biopolynov teams are  working for years in bioplastics modification and properties improvement. The team 
gained a strong experience in R&D on bioplastics which permit Biopolynov to answer the best to the customers’ needs. 
Natureplast also has the widest raw material portfolio in Europe and has access to almost all kind of bioplastics and additives 
all around the world.  
Biopolynov has a strong knowledge in the development and production of bioplastics compounds at small industrial scale 
(from 1 to 50 kg). An industrial production line (200 kg/h) is planned to be bought by the end of 2017. 
 
Role in the Project:  
Natureplast’s role will mainly be focused on characterizing the raw polymers (BioPE  and PHA) produced by the consortium, 
and to modify them to improve their processability and properties for the targeted applications. 
Role of Natureplast includes the participation in WPs 1, 5, 6, 7 and 8. 
Scientific team:  
Dr. Laurent Bélard (M) – R&D Manager of Natureplast / Biopolynov.  
Degree in Material Engineering from the Ecole Européenne en Génie des Matériaux (EEIGM) of Nancy, Ph.D. in Materials 
Chemistry from the University of Reims Champagne-Ardenne. He was biomaterials R&D projects manager of the Pôle 
Européen de Plasturgie in Oyonnax during 3 years and then joined Natureplast / Biopolynov company as R&D Manager in 
2011. He has performed dozens of development projects on bioplastics materials and has a specific strong knowledge in 
bioplastics materials and compounding. Was in charge of technical follow up of an INTERREG project and of FP7 
SUCCIPACK’s project as well as French collaborative projects (FUI, ADEME, FEDER). 
Mr Guillaume Lebouteiller (M) – Technical and collaborative projects Manager of Natureplast / Biopolynov.  
Degree in Chemistry Engineering from the Ecole Nationale Supérieure d’Ingénieurs of Caen (ENSICAEN). He has a specific 
knowledge regarding biopolymers materials, market and formulation. He has supported for more than 7 years around 500 
customers and partners in their bioplastics developments especially regarding technical surveys and formulations 
development. He was in charge of administrative follow up of FP7 SUCCIPACK’s project and other French collaborative 
projects (FUI, ADEME, FEDER). 
Ms. Audrey Bautista (F) – Project Manager of Natureplast / Biopolynov. 
Professional Licence in Polymer Science and Composites of IUT of Alençon, BTS Europlastique of ISPA and Master in 
Conception, Method and Innovation, of University of Béthune. 
She is in charge since 2011 of Internal R&D Project Management in Natureplast / Biopolynov and has specific knowledge in 
Polymer science, bioplastics compounding and injection molding. 
Related publications, patents or products:  
- PL SF grade: PLA-based compound developed by Natureplast specifically for film extrusion applications  

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 89 
 
 
Related Projects:  
 
Technical equipment: 
- Twin-screw extruder, TSA FSCM 21-50 
- Calendering and blown film extrusion 
- Injection molding, Krauss Maffei 80 tons 
- HDT/Vicat Bench, CEAST, ISO 75 / 306 
- Tensile bench, Instron 3367, ISO 527 / 178 
- Charpy impact resistance, CEAST, ISO 179 
- MFI, CEAST, ISO 1133 
- Shore hardness, ISO 868 
- Accelerated weathering station 
- Karl Fischer moisture analysis 
- Density, ISO 1183 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project acronym/description. Scope End Year Website  
SUCCIPACK: Development of active, 
intelligent and sustainable food 
PACKaging using Polybutylene 
SUCCInate 
Development of formulations 
based on PBS to improve 
properties and processability 
in injection moulding and 
extrusion blowing 
2015 http://www.succipack.eu/ 
PLA softening for applications in 
plastic bags and film extrusion 
Development of formulations 
based on PLA to improve 
properties and processability 
in extrusion blowing 
2015 - 
  
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 90 
 
 
PARTNER 13 
Name: IRIAF (CLAMBER BIOREFINERY) 
Web page: http://clamber.castillalamancha.es/ 
Type: RTO 
Country: SPAIN 
 
Brief description of the organization:  
The Regional Institute of Castilla-La Mancha for Agri-Food and Forest Research and Development (IRIAF), which belongs to 
the Ministry of Agriculture and Environment of the Regional Government of Castilla-La Mancha (JCCM), consists of 6 different 
research centres. It developed the CLAMBER Project (Castilla-La Mancha Bio-Economy Region Project) and has extensive 
experience in proceedings related to R&D&i as well as dissemination and training activities related to the agri-food and forest 
sectors.  
Thanks to this Project, which was co-funded with ERDF through the Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness of the National 
Government of Spain (MINECO), the CLAMBER Plant was built in 2015. It is a public demonstrative biorefinery at the service 
of companies and dedicated to scientific research, scale-up experiments and development of new processes and high value 
products from lignocellulosic and fermentable biomass, both residual and cultivated.  
 
Role in the Project: IRIAF will be in charge of the VFA valorisation throughout the conversion of VFA to MCFA and later into 
PHA in a demonstrative scale (bioreactor of 20 m 3). Also, it will treat with a passive system based on constructed wetlands 
the wastewater generated once the microorganisms that accumulate PHA are separ ated. Role of IRIAF includes the 
participation in WPs 1, 3, 6, 7 and 8. 
Scientific team:  
Francisco García Iglesias (M) is PhD in Naval Engineer, graduated in Foreign Trade, trainer in Total Quality Systems and 
Associate Professor in the UPM. He has been Director of the Biomass Department of the CENER for 2 years, where he has 
participated in several projects with internat ional organizations. He has worked as Technical Director of Omnitecnia, a 
company dedicated to engineering and consultancy of generation, co -generation and renewable energies projects. He was 
General Director of ABB Energy Services, Director of Co -generation department in the Guascor Group, Project Manager in 
New Sulzer Diesel France and Director of Propulsion in Astilleros Españoles (Navantia). Since July 2014, he is coordinator of 
the CLAMBER Project. 
Javier Mena Sanz (Me) is PhD in Chemical Engineering f rom the UCLM in the field of environment (wastewater treatment, 
anaerobic digestion, composting, waste valorization, etc.). He has been an assistant professor and researcher at the university 
for three years. Later, he coordinated R+D department in the com pany Alquimia Soluciones Ambientales for 6 years where 
participated in 13 R+D projects and 8 publications. Since April 2014, he is plant supervisor of the CLAMBER Project. 
Gema Duque Gutierrez (F)  is a Chemical Engineer (Process Engineering specialty) with  Master in Environmental 
Management, Quality and Occupational Health and Safety in its three specialties. She worked for two years as a researcher 
in the UCLM, participating in several publications in scientific journals and conferences. Later, she worked for more than five 
years as a Process, Quality and R&D Engineer in the company Silicio Solar, being its main functions: production 
automatization, optimization of process parameters, control of specifications and quality of the finished product. Since Apri l 
2014, she is plant technician of the CLAMBER Project. 
Daniel López Pérez (M) is a Civil Engineer from the UPM and graduate in Business Administration and Management from 
the Open University. He is conducting a Master of Research in Economics, specializin g in Industrial and Services Economy 
focused on the realization of the PhD. He has an experience of 3 years in Urbaser in applied research projects in MSW 
treatment plants (both mechanical and biological), anaerobic digestion and landfill biogas and of one year in Idom participating 
in projects of similar plants to those mentioned previously. Nowadays, he is a researcher of Aqualogy and, since April 2014, 
he is plant technician of the CLAMBER Project. 
Juan Jose Gonzalez Ruiz (M) holds a degree in Business Administration and Management from the UCLM with an MBA 
and Advanced Course in Quality Management and Risk Prevention. He has more than eight years of professional 
experience in Prefabricados Ciudad Real, of which 2 years as Head of the Finance and Contracting Department for the 
construction of the production plant and six years as Head of the Purchasing and Control Production Departments. 
Throughout this period, he was also responsible for the collection and justification of national and European Public Funds. 
Since July 2014, he is administrator of the CLAMBER Project. 
Related publications, patents or products:  
None 

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 91 
 
 
Related Projects:  
 
Project 
acronym/description. 
Scope End 
Year Website  
CLAMBER. Castilla La 
mancha Bioeconomy 
Region. 
To create a technologically advanced 
biorefinery pilot plant that allows the 
research on production of innovative 
bioproducts 
2015 www.clamber.castillalamancha.
es 
Technical equipment: 
IRIAF’s infrastructure relevant to the proposed work: 
- UP-STREAM: this area aims to transform raw lignocellulosic biomass into a fermentable carbon source or store and adapt 
raw materials (waste or by-products) that can be part of fermentation media. It consists of solid biomass storage (4 x 35 m3), 
mills for herbaceous and woody biomass (200 kg/h), extractor with vapour (3 m3), Two-step Steam Explosion Reactor (400 l, 
up to 21 barg) and solid-liquid separators (15 m3/h). 
- MID-STREAM: this area aims to transform biologically (anaerobic digestion, fermentation, etc.) the carbon source generated 
in Up-stream in different products of interest (biofuels, building blocks, etc.). It consists of Microbiology laboratory for micro 
management (starters, inoculants, etc.), Bioreactors for hydrolysis and anaerobic and aerobic fermentation: 2 x 3 l, 2 x 30 l, 1 
x 300 l, 1 x 3,000 l and 1 x 20,000 l, Systems for sterilization, substrate preparation, addition of sterile reactants, clean ing in 
place, and other utilities. 
- DOWN-STREAM: this ar ea is formed by a series of modules of typical technologies of industrial biotechnology segment 
ability to interface with each other in order to concentrate and purify the products of interest from the remaining fermentation 
broth. It consists of Harvestin g Tanks with capacity to act as a extractor: 1 x 10,000 l (ATEX), 1 x 10,000 l (No ATEX), 1 x 
1,500 l (ATEX) and 1 x 1,500 l (No ATEX), Microfiltration system (1 m3/h) and Centrifugation system (1.5 m3/h) (ATEX). 
- ANAEROBIC DIGESTION: It is a modular and transportable pilot plant for experiments of anaerobic digestion and co -
digestion of solid and liquid organic biomass to produce biogas and bio -fertilizers. It consists of Liquid storage tank (20 m 3), 
Solid storage hopper (10 m 3), Pasteurization tank (1 m 3), Homogenization Tank (3 m 3), Digester (11 m 3), Digestate tank (5 
m3) and Gasometer (10 m3). 
- UTILITIES: this area includes all the necessary services for the operation of the bio -refinery units: power supply, steam 
boilers, process water, cooling water (Tower, chiller, glycol), compressed air and instrumentation and process gases (NH 3, 
N2, O2, CO2). 
- WASTE MANAGEMENT: this area includes the necessary for the treatment and/or storage of liquid and solid wastes 
produced in the biorefinery facilities previous to the discharge or delivery manager, always prioritizing the 3Rs: Reduce, Reuse 
and Recycle. The wastewater treatment is based on a hybrid constructed wetland system with reeds, where the organic 
compounds of the wastewater that could not be used previously are assimilated and generate a new lignocellulosic biomass 
that can be used as a new resource in the plant, closing the cycle. 
- PROCESS CONTROL: this area is a control room where, through a SCADA system, the following activities are carried out: 
processing and monitoring of the process information, remote control devices and settings values in databases system, alarm 
monitoring and deployment of processes, reporting and statistical process data and storage of historical data and trends of 
process variables. 
- ANALYTICAL CONTROL PROCESS: It is a laboratory that supports the activity of the processing and environmental units, 
aimed at providing the necessary techniques to develop most of the assessments and monitoring the operation of the different 
experiments. 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 92 
 
 
PARTNER 14 
Name: BCM BioEconomy Cluster Management 
GmbH 
Web page: www.bioeconomy.de 
Type: SME 
Country: 
Germany  
Brief description of the organization:  
BCM GmbH is the management organization of the leading edge cluster BioEconomy. The BioEconomy Cluster is the only 
nationwide operating Cluster in Germany focussing on the complete value chain of wood based BioEconomy. The 
BioEconomy Cluster is a full memb er of BioBased Industries Consortium. BCM coordinates 80 Members from Industry, 
Scientific Institutes and Universities. BCM is responsible for the coordination of research activities with an actual Budget of 
80 Mio. EUR. BCM focuses on Business Development  support, Education, Communication, Dissemination and IP 
management 
 
Role in the Project:  
BCM is WP leader of WP 7 “Dissemination, communication and exploitation activities”. The overall objective of this WP is: 
a) to promote the URBioFIN project and diss eminate its results as widely and as effectively as possible to all relevant 
stakeholders, the broad public and the scientific community by all modern communication means. 
b) to ensure proper and effective handling of Intellectual Property Rights to manage effectively  exploitation of project 
results within the consortium as well as with third parties. 
These activities are part of BCM’s daily business and will by performed by their respective experts. 
In addition to that, the role of BCM includes the participation in WP 8. 
Scientific team:  
Dr. Rainer Busch (M) is a chemist by education with a doctorate in organic chemistry from the university of Saarbruecken 
(1984). He has worked in the chemical industry for more than 23 years with vari ous positions in R&D and Knowledge -
Management.  He was involved in several large EU -projects and numerous national projects all related to renewable 
resources. He was the coordinator of POLCOAT (BRITE -EURAM, EU-FP4) and NANOPOL (GROWTH, EU -FP5). In the 
FP-7 project BIOCONSEPT, Dr. Busch was in charge of exploitation and IP management in the work package “Exploitation 
and Dissemination”. Since 2008, Dr. Busch is owner and director of T+I Consulting, a consulting company specialized in 
the material use of ren ewable resources. In 2013 he became scientific advisor to the BioEconomy Cluster management 
GmbH and one of its two cluster managers. 
Horst Mosler (M) is the Managing Director of BCM. He studied Business Administration with a diploma in field of marketing, 
human resources and management of hospitals (1985).  He has more than 30 years industry experience in managing both 
large enterprises and SME, both in national and international (French, Japanese) companies. Since 2013 Mr. Mosler is 
owner and director of M + C Management and Consulting, focussing on Business Consulting and Business Development, 
Innovation process and investment management, specialised in Biobased and Sustainable Economy. Since 2012 Mr. 
Mosler is boardmember of the BioEconomy Leading Edge C luster. In 2013 he became its manageging director. He is a 
active member of the programming group in the BioBased Industries Consortium. 
Anne-Karen Beck (F) has a Master of Business Administration degree from the Technical University of Dresden (2004). 
She worked in the consulting business for more than eight years with specialization in market research, entrepreneurship, 
leadership and human resource development. She was responsible for the contracting and organization of consulting 
projects in different industries. For almost two years she assisted entrepreneurs with their business plans and investments, 
coordinated diverse workshops and coachings and worked on expanding the sales and networking contacts. 
Since 2016, Ms. Beck is the project coordinator for  bio-based entrepreneurs and innovation activities in the BioEconomy 
Cluster. 
Hendrik Etzold (M) has a Master of Science for Business Administration and Engineering from the University of Applied 
Science in Leipzig (2015). During the education the main fields of study were mechanical and energy engineering as well 
as management. Beside the master’s degree he worked two years as a student assistant in a regional research institute. 
Since 11/2015, Mr. Etzold is a Business Development Assistant in the BioEconomy Leading Edge Cluster. 
Related publications, patents or products:  
As a service provider, BCM neither produces products nor does it publish articles in journals. We can provide though a list 
of Dr. Rainer Busch’s most significant publications in the field of bioeconomy.  

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 93 
 
 
- Th. Hirth, R. Busch “Biorefineries for renewable monomers” in “Handbook of biodegradable polymers” 2nd edition Smithers 
Rapra 2014, ed. by C. Bastioli 
- Thomas Hirth, Jan -Moritz Iden, Rainer Busch “Sustainability and the Chemical Industry” in Ullmann's Encyclopedia of 
Industrial Chemistry, Online ISBN: 9783527306732 
- “Bio-based Building blocks and Polymers in the World - Capacities, Production and Applications: Status Quo and Trends 
towards 2020” - UPDATE 2015, nova Institute (Hürth, Germany), co-author Rainer Busch for chapter MONOMERS 
- R. Busch “Biobased Products – Market Needs and Opportunities” in R. Ulber, D. Sell and Th. Hirth “Renewable Materials”, 
Wiley-VCH, 2011 
- Johan Thoen und Rainer Busch “Industrial Chemicals from Biomass – Industrial Concepts” in B. Kamm, P. Gruber, M. 
Kamm “Biorefineries – Industrial Processes and Products”, Volume 2, Wiley-VCH, 2005 
Related Projects:  
 
Project acronym/description. Scope End 
Year Website  
VP 5.2 “Clustermanagement”  Coordination and management of the 
leading edge cluster BioEconomy 2017 www.bioeconomy.de 
GA Förderung: BioEconomy 
Clustermangement 
Building a regional growth core for 
bioeconomy in Saxony-Anhalt  2016 - 
BioConSepT-Bio-Conversation and 
Separation Technology 
Bioconcept focuses on the improvement 
of the process elements to reduce costs 
and become more competitive in bio-tech 
processes 
2015 http://www.bioconsept
.eu 
Technical equipment: 
For the proposed work there is no need for any significant infrastructure and major items of technical equipment. 
 
 
 
 
 
PARTNER 15 
Name: SES STEFANY EMBALLAGES SERVICES  
(Terminated) 
Web page: www.ses-packaging.com 
Type: SME 
Country: 
FRANCE 
 
Brief description of the organization:  
From the start, in 1988, STEFANY EMBALLAGES SERVICES Company has distinguished itself by manufacturing precut 
rolls polyethylene packaging. It has constantly adapted to new requirements and enlarged its range of products. 
SES is the 1st french independant manufacture of water soluble strip laundry bags and blood specimens bags. 
Since 10 years, SES developps biocompostable packaging with permanent R&D. 
Also SES: 
• is leader of sigle/disposable dust covers for laundry trolleys or kitchen trolleys, bun pan racks. 
• is specialist in packaging for laundry linen 
• has innovated in vegetable polymers 
• has 4 certifications : ISO 9001 – 14 001 – 15 378 et NF EN 15 593 
 
Role in the Project:  

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 94 
 
 
The role of SES is focused on the validation of the use of biopolymers as materials to produce packaging such us bags or 
films for cosmetic sector. The biopolymers produced within the project will be tested in real manufacturing chains making 
possible to check at end-user level the suitability for specific sector of cosmetics. Role of SES includes the participation in 
WPs 1, 5, 6, 7 and 8. 
Scientific team:  
Grail Jean-Philippe (M) – Company Manager 
He has been developing management, purchasing, commercial, production, logistics, accounting and quality 
activities in the company since 1998. His background is focused on office accounting and administrative 
management of companies.  
Related publications, patents or products:  
None 
Related Projects:  
 
Project acronym/description. Scope End 
Year Website  
Bioversus: ours range of products made with bioplastique Innovative products 2016 www.bioversus.fr 
GreenPE: ours range of products made with GreenPE Innovative products 2017-
2018 - 
Technical equipment: 
- 7 blown extruder 
- 1 blown co-extruder (installation end of 2016) 
- 2 printing machine (4 colors) 
- 3 recycling machine 
- 9 bags making machine 
 
 
 
 
 
PARTNER 16 
Name: NATRUE AISBL 
Web page: http://www.natrue.org/ 
Type: Association 
of SMEs Country: 
Belgium  
Brief description of the organization:  
NATRUE AISBL is a Brussels -based international non -profit association consisting of natural and organic cosmetics 
manufacturers, and a holder and setter of a private standard in the sector. NATRUE is not a certification body.   
Founded in 2007 by pioneers of the sector including WELEDA AG, WALA Heilmittel GmbH (Dr.Hauschka Skin Care), 
Laverana GmbH & Co. KG, Primavera Life GmbH, NATRUE has currently 49 members spread across 25 countries. 
Adoption of the NATRUE label on certified products currently exceeds 4.700 products across a total of 204 brands. 
NATRUE’s activities can be grouped into three main areas: 
Advocacy: NATRUE works to protect and promote natural and organic cosmetics and their ingredients, assessing the 
impact that emerging or evolving regulations will have on the sector and contributing to the discussions with the European 
institutions, always bearing in mind consumer’s expectations and sectorial needs 
Label: NATRUE helps consumers to identify which products are truly natural and organic in a sector which still lacks a legal 
and harmonized definition. 

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 95 
 
 
Research: NATRUE pools resources to investigate scie ntific issues of concern. Being an association, we gather the 
expertise of different companies, institutions and other associations to help the sector position itself with regards to specific 
topics. 
NATRUE is listed on the EU transparency register under the identification number: 75060586073-86. NATRUE is a liaison 
organisation representative providing expert technical opinion to ISO TC/217/WG4 and CEN TC/392 for cosmetics, and is 
a member of the EU Commission’s Working Group on Cosmetic Products (E01302). 
 
Role in the Project:  
The Role of NATRUE AISBL is related to the coordination with supporting member companies from the association which 
includes:  
- Development of packaging concepts and specifications for cosmetic applications in WP5. 
- Studies on product-packaging interactions in specific cosmetic product applications in WP5.  
In addition to that, the role of NATRUE AISBL includes the participation in WPs 1, 6, 7 and 8.  
Scientific team:  
Dr. Belen Marquez Garcia (F),  
Current: Regulatory and Scientific Assistant at NATRUE AISBL. 
https://be.linkedin.com/pub/maría-belén-márquez-garcía/b9/7a0/240  
Former: Doctor Assistant Professor (VIB Department of Plant Systems Biology, University of Ghent, Belgium); 
Postdoctoral Researcher (Centre for Plant Sciences, University of Leeds);  
Researcher (Department of Environmental Biology and Public Health, University of Huelva, Spain);  
PhD Student (Department of Environmental Biology and Public Health, University of Huelva, Spain). 
Dr. Mark Smith (M),  
Current: Director General at NATRUE AISBL (fo rmerly:  Scientific and Regulatory Manager at NATRUE AISBL). 
http://www.linkedin.com/pub/mark-smith/2b/825/7b  
Former: Stagiaire postdoctoral (Département de biochimie, Université de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada); 
Research Fellow (The Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular biology, University of Leeds);  
PhD Student (School of Chemistry and Faculty of Medicine & Health Sciences, University of Nottingham). 
Related publications, patents or products: 
Products certified to carry the NATRUE private standard from Member Companies and/or Label Users can be found at: 
http://www.natrue.org/ 
Related Projects:  
 
Project acronym/description. Scope End 
Year Website  
O4S (Organic for Surfactants). Development 
of new biosurfactants produced from the 
fermentation of organic waste products from 
organic agriculture in accordance with the 
NATRUE Criteria (private standard for natural 
and organic cosmetics). Three-year EU-
funded (grant #262507). Consortium research 
project. 
The project addressed a critical necessity of 
the EU natural cosmetic sector, which lacks 
a sustainable source of surfactants that can 
both be considered as natural and certified of 
organic origin.  
Dec 
2014 
http://www.
organic4sur
factants.fra
unhofer.de/ 
Technical equipment: 
NATRUE itself has no technical equipment as an association . Its members are SME cosmetic manufactures with access 
to technical equipment access 
 
  
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 96 
 
 
PARTNER 17 
Name: Agencia Estatal Consejo Superior de 
Investigaciones Científicas 
Web page: www.icp.csic.es  
Type: RTO 
Country: Spain  
Brief description of the organization:  
The CSIC (Spanish National Research Council) is Spain’s largest public research institution, and ranks third among Europe’s 
largest research organization. The CSIC is attached to the Spanish Ministry of Science, Innovation and Universities through 
the State Secretariat for Research, Development and Innovation, and plays a key role in scientific and technological policy in 
Spain and worldwide.  According to its Statute (Article 4), CSIC has 4 main missions: 
- to foster multidisciplinary scientific and technological research 
- Knowledge transfer to industry and society 
- Education and training of scientific and technical staff  
- Creation of Technology Based Companies  
CSIC has 10.940 employees, including 3.764 researchers. CSIC has 120 Institutes spread across the country and covering 
different areas of Science and Technology. 67 of them are fully-owned institutes and 53 are Joint Research Units in partnership 
with other Spanish universities or research institutions. CSIC has also a delegation in Brussels. 
CSIC supports research and training across a wide range of knowledge, from the most basic or fundamental aspects of science 
to the most complex technological developments; from human and social sciences to food science and technology, including 
biology, biomedicine, physics, chemistry and mater ials, natural resources and agricultural sciences. As the third largest 
research organization in Europe, CSIC carries out research in all fields of knowledge, throughout its 123 Institutes distributed 
in eight areas: 
• Humanities and Social Sciences 
• Biology and Biomedicine 
• Natural Resources 
• Agricultural Sciences 
• Physical Science and Technologies 
• Materials Science and Technology 
• Food Science and Technology 
• Chemical Science and Technology 
CSIC produces 20% of the national scientific output (more than 12.000 ISI paper in 2014). CSIC remains the leading patent 
filer among research bodies in Spain with more than 180 patent requests published in 2014. 
CSIC has a broad experience in managing large and singular infrastructures. For instance, CSIC provides services to the entire 
scientific community through management of the Singular Scientific and Technological Infrastructures (ICTS) such as Calar 
Alto Astronomical Observatory (with MaxPlanck), Doñana Biological Station, European Synchrotron Radiat ion Facility, 
Hesperides Ocean Research Vessel, Integrated Micro and Nanoelectronics Clean Room, Juan Carlos I Antarctic Base, Max 
Von Laue-Paul Langevin Institute and Sarmiento de Gamboa Ocean Research Vessel. 
In addition, CSIC has a broad experience in conducting R&D projects funded by national and international public agencies and 
industry. 
CSIC is a major player in the development of the European research area and therefore a significant contributor to the 
European integration process. Within the 7th Framework Programme CSIC has signed 726 actions (including 70 coordinated 
by CSIC). As to the number of projects, CSIC is listed the 1st organisation in Spain and the 4th in Europe within the research 
organizations, with a total FP7 contribution of over 264 million euros (E-CORDA).  
As to the funding obtained by CSIC within each program, the distribution is People 20%, Cooperation 47%, Capacities 8% and 
Ideas 25%. Taking into account the research areas, the most relevant ones in terms of funding have been Phy sical Science 
and Technology and Biology and Biomedicine.  
In H2020 (2014-2018) CSIC has obtained 446 projects with a total EU financial contribution of 181 million euros. As E-CORDA 
points out CSIC is listed the 1st organisation in Spain and the 3rd parti cipant within the research organization by number of 
projects. 

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 97 
 
 
CSIC is a major player in the ERC programme with a total of 87 projects signed as Host Institution in all areas of knowledge.  
CSIC is also an active member in Knowledge and Innovation Communities (KIC), such as Raw Materials and Food of the 
European Institute for Innovation and Technology (EIT). 
The Group for Energy and Sustainable Chemistry from the ‘ Instituto de Catálisis y Petroleoquímica’ (ICP) of CSIC is located 
in Madrid. It comprises 10 staff researchers, 5 postdoc students and several PhD and Master students. It has a long experience 
in the field of applied and basic catalysis (heterogeneous, homogeneous, electrocatalysis and photocatalysis) and catalytic 
process for clean energy and sustainable chemistry. In particular, it has a great deal of experience in the field of C1 chemistry, 
including H2 production from CH4 and syngas transformation into hydrocarbons (liquid fuels, short chain olefins…) and/or 
oxygenates (methanol, DME etc). The group has participated in several EU and National projects related with these topics 
Role in the Project:  
CSIC is the partner in the project in charge of designing and building a pilot plant for bioethylene production from bio ethanol. 
The pilot p lant will produce Ethylene with a goal to validate that the produced ethanol is suitable for sustainable ethylene 
derivative chemicals. Role of CSIC includes the participation in the following WPs: 2, 5, 6, 7 and 8. 
 
Scientific team:  
Dr. Jose M. Campos-Martin (M), Scientific Researcher at the Instituto of Catalisis y Petroleoquimica of CSIC. He obtained 
his PhD from the Autonomous University of Madrid in 1995.He has more than 25 years of experience in the R&D. He is co -
author of  more tha n 90 papers published in peer -reviewed journals with “h index“ of 3 3, co-inventor of 13 patents, project 
leader of 11 projects and research contracts, and participated in other 10, and was adviser of 5 PhD thesis. He is specialized 
in the development of no vel homogeneous and heterogeneous catalytic processes, with a strong emphasis on the efficient 
usage of raw materials and energy as well as on the minimal generation of unwanted by-products. 
 
Dr. Sergio Rojas (M) holds a Investigador Científico position at CSIC. He has a large experience in the area of heterogeneous 
catalysis for different processes including transformation of syngas into liquid fuels and alcohols, and transformation into DME 
or olefins. He has participated in several EU and National funded projects and in several projects with private companies. He 
is or has been supervisor to 6 PhD students and several postdoctoral researchers. He is co-inventor of 3 patents. Publications 
according to Scopus (Novembrer 2018): 102 publications, 3521 citations, h-index 32. 
 
Dr. M. Consuelo Alvarez-Galván (F), Tenured Scientist at the Instituto of Catalisis y Petroleoquimica of CSIC. She obtained 
her PhD from the La Laguna University in 2000. She has more than 20 years of experience in the R&D. She is co -author of  
more than 70 papers published in peer -reviewed journals, co-inventor of 2 patents, project leader of 3 projects and research 
contracts, and participated in other 10, and was adviser of 2 PhD thesis. She is specialized in the development of novel catalytic 
processes, with a strong emphasis on the efficient usage of raw materials and energy as well as on the minimal generation of 
unwanted by-products. 
 
Dr. Miguel A. Peña (M) holds a Research scientist position at the CSIC. He has experience in heterogeneous catalysis and 
electrocatalysis. He has a large experience in the synthesis and characterization of perovskites. He is the secretary for the  
Spanish Hydrogen Association. Publications according to Scopus (Novembrer 2018): 113 publications, 6700 citations, h-index 
37. 
 
Dr. Silvia Morales-delaRosa (F). She works at the Instituto of Catalisis y Petroleoquimica of CSIC since 2009. She obtained 
her PhD from the Autonomous University of Madrid in 2015. She has more than 15 years of experience in the R&D. She is co-
author of 10 papers published in peer -reviewed journals with “h index“ of 5, co -inventor of 2 patents, and participated in 8 
projects, and was adviser of 1 PhD thesis. She is specialized in the design at molecular scale, preparation and optimized 
synthesis of catalysts. Characterization of the catalysts at different levels, textural, superficial and structural. Design, assembly, 
handling and modification for its improvement, if necessary, of equipment for measuring catalytic activity. Main work is carried 
out in the treatment of lignocellulosic biomass with liquid ions and hydrated inorganic salts and subsequent catalyzed hydrolysis 
to obtain high added value compounds. Responsible for and calibration of reaction product analysis equipment such as: Gas 
Chromatography (GC), Liquid Chromatography (HPLC), Gas Chromatograph Coupled to a Mass Spectrometer (Quadrupole) 
and Fourier Transf orm Infrared Spectroscopy, UV -Vis Spectroscopy and Raman spectroscopy coupled to an optical 
microscope. In addition, user of Transmission Electron Microscopy, thermal analysis (TG, TPR, TPD, TPO) and responsible 
for X-ray photoelectric spectroscopy equipment (XPS). 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 98 
 
 
Related publications, patents or products (5 max): 
• R.M. Ladera, M. Ojeda, J.L.G. Fierro, S. Rojas, TiO2-supported heteropoly acid catalysts for dehydration of methanol to 
dimethyl ether: Relevance of dispersion and support interaction, Catalysis Science and Technology, 5 (2015) 484-491.  
• R.M. Ladera, J.L.G. Fierro, M. Ojeda, S. Rojas, TiO2 -supported heteropoly acids for low -temperature synthesis of 
dimethyl ether from methanol, Journal of Catalysis, 312 (2014) 195-203.  
• S. Morales-Delarosa, J.M. Campos-Martin, Catalytic processes and catalyst development in biorefining, in: K. Waldron 
(Ed.) Advances in Biorefineries, Woodhead Publishing, 2014, pp. 152-198. 
• R. Ladera, F.J. Pérez-Alonso, J.M. González-Carballo, M. Ojeda, S. Rojas, J.L.G. Fierro, Catalytic valorization of CO2 
via methanol synthesis with Ga-promoted Cu-ZnO-ZrO2 catalysts, Applied Catalysis B: Environmental, 142-143 (2013) 
241-248. 
 
Related Projects: 
 
Project 
acronym/description. Scope End Year Website  
ENE2013-47826-C4-2-R  
Development of 3D 
Catalytic Structures for 
nonedible oils 
Hydrotreatment” 
2016  
ENE2016-74889-C4-3-R 
Structured Catalytic 
Systems from 3D 
Impressions for the 
Hydrotreatment of Non-
Edible Oils and Fats 
2019  
DEMCAMER. 4 year EU 
funded project (call  FP7-
NMP-2010-LARGE-4) ID: 
262840 from-  
Design and manufacturing 
of Calalytic Membrane 
reactors by developing new 
nano-architectured catalytic 
and selective membrane 
materials 
2015 https://cordis.europa.eu/proj
ect/rcn/99344_es.html 
FLEDGED- 4 year EU 
funded project (call H2020-
LCE-2016-2017 ID 727600- 
The project addresses the 
Biomass to Dimethyl ether 
in a direct process 
2020 http://www.fledged.eu/ 
 
Technical equipment: 
CSIC team has the following techniques in catalysts preparation in their own labs, or are fully accessible in their institute. For 
the synthesis of catalysts, we have two lines of synthesis at controlled atmospheres (Schlenk), 2 rotary evaporators, ovens 
and reactors for thermal synthesis, autoclaves for thermal synthesis, one glove box and other minor equipment. As for the 
characterization CSIC have (or have access to) Infrared spectrometers, Raman spectrometer, XPS, XRD (with in situ chamber 
for treatment of samples under controlled atmosphere and temperature), Chemisorption of gases, BET, ATG, HRTEM/STEM. 
In addition, they have the possibility of using synchrotron facilities for XAS (EXAFS and XANES) and XPS analyses and access 
to nuclear reactors for Pow er neutron diffraction. All of the above techniques will be available for the sake of the project.   In 
addition, in situ characterization using DRIFT cells are available. CSIC is well equipped for the evaluation of the catalytic  
activity. We have two Microactivity catalytic reactors, consisting in a fixed bed reactor and the possibility to feed up to 4 gases 
and liquids. Temperature is controlled by a thermocouple in the catalytic bed, from r.t. to 700 °C. The reactor is integrated  
within a hot box, with ma ximum temperature of 180º C. A pressure control system allows working at pressures up to 90 bar. 
Several gases and liquid can be fed to the reactors. Product analysis and quantification is done by gas chromatography. We 
have two on line Varian CP -3800 gas chromatograph equipped with a Hayesep Q packed column (2 m length, 0.32 mm 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 99 
 
 
diameter) connected to a thermal conductivity detector (TCD) and an Rtx-1 capillary (60 m length 0.25 mm diameter) column 
connected to a flame ionization detector (FID). Adapted to cryogenic cooling. 
CSIC team has access and utilises industry-leading software for the simulation and optimisation of chemical processes, Aspen 
Plus software engineering (V10 (36.0.0249)), this software will be used for the basic engineering design of the bioethanol 
dehydration module to be constructed and operated in PERSEO installations. 
 
 
PARTNER 18 
Full Name: IRIS Technology Solutions S.L. (IRIS) 
Web page:   http://www.iristechnologygroup.com/ 
Country: Spain 
Type: SME  
  
IRIS is an advanced engineering company that specialises in process monitoring, control and optimisation. We develop and 
integrate turnkey advanced solutions based on: NIR chemical monitoring (patent -pending novel handheld device and in -line 
solutions); hyperspectral imaging solutions for foreign body detection and chemical composition analysis; data management 
and embedded Artificial Intelligence solutions, e.g. data mining (including of big production data) to develop predictive models 
for decision support and to automatise process optimisation. As an enabler for our monitoring solutions, as well as for wider  
digital transformation in industry, we develop and deploy Industrial SMAC (Social, Mobile, Analytics and Cloud) solutions and 
IT platforms for numerous industry applications.  
In the frame of the Factories of the Future, IRIS is 
working with manufacturers, OEMs and solution 
providers for industry to transition their product 
models to the Industry4.0 paradigm, whe reby real-
time access to data about critical process 
parameters and product quality attributes can 
contribute to improved quality and process 
efficiencies. IRIS’ vision for Industry4.0 centres on 
the conversion of data into business value, and 
involves: 
● Effectively collecting huge volumes of reliable 
and informative data -not only about the 
process conditions but also about what is really 
taking place within the process-, whereby, IRIS 
specialises in advanced monitoring systems 
(as opposed to traditional control systems) that 
e.g. provide compositional information in real 
time. 
● Unveiling relevant information from the data -
by supporting the involved ICT tools with Science-based resources- in order to build cognitive-biases-free decision support 
systems. 
IRIS provides a balanced combination of state-of-the-art online analysers and the engineering services for rationally integrating 
them in between the production line and the factory information system. IRIS also provides digitisation solutions for supporting 

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 100 
 
 
the use of novel processing and circular economy shift in the industry of the future. 
The company was established in 2007 and currently employs 60+ staff with a turnover of > €5 M. We are based over two sites 
(Barcelona and Dublin) and are fully equippe d with engineering and production workshops, wet chemistry and analytical 
laboratory, optics labs (2), and an electronics/telecommunications lab. IRIS has a multidisciplinary knowledge engineering and 
science team (including 12 PhD holders and 27 engineers in the fields of electronic, mechatronic, mechanical, industrial design, 
system engineering, application programming and web development, SMAC technologies, material, environment & food 
science, chemistry and physics) that can support not only the develop ment of customised solutions but also their optimal 
validation thanks to a differential scientific & technical breakthrough approach and a deep application understanding. 
IRIS is certified under ISO 9001:2008 and UNE -EN-ISO 166002: Management Systems R&D&i . In relation to systematizing 
the methodology towards the definition of our clients’ needs in their transition to Industry 4.0, IRIS has significant expertise in 
the use of the Quality Function Deployment systems engineering methodology.  
IRIS is a member of the following sectorial networks: SPIRE, SPIE and SECPHO, in addition to regional industrial collectives 
such as Smart Space (association of companies and organisations that specialise in ‘smartification’).  
Technical and Management team:   
 MSc GEORGIOS CHALKIAS (male). Project Manager at IRIS. BSc in Environmental and Natural Resource Management 
from University of Ioannina (Greece). MSc in Industrial Ecology from Universities of Leiden and Delft (the Netherlands). 
Georgios has over 10 years of experi ence working at the nexus of innovation and sustainability as a researcher, consultant 
and, most recently, project and product manager. He has developed expertise in integrating principles of circular economy with 
digital technologies (e.g. industry 4.0) a s applied across a wide range of industrial and business applications. Examples of 
topics and sectors include: Applying Process Analytic Technologies (PAT) across the process industries and high value 
manufacturing, enabling by -product exchange in industri al parks and clusters (industrial symbiosis), testing cooperative 
business models for sustainable production and consumption of biogas, developing “sharing economy” business models for 
public transport, developing optical & ultrasonic Non-Destructive Testing (NDT) solutions for predictive maintenance in various 
sectors, analyzing corporate sustainability performance for responsible investments in various sectors. Georgios has learned 
to systematically seek solutions for complex multidimensional problems and delivering high quality results under strict deadlines 
and, through his experience in international and interdisciplinary environments, he enjoys working with and adapting to different 
cultural and disciplinary contexts. 
Dr. LAURA RODRÍGUEZ TURIENZO . B.S in Food Science & Technology (2008) Masters in Innovation in Safety & Food 
Technologies (2010), PhD in Biological Sciences (2011), all from University of Santiago de Compostela (USC), Spain. She has 
participated in a number o f R&D regionally nationally and internationally funded projects aimed at developing and validating 
new bio-based active edible packaging, physico -chemical characterization of novel foods and valorisation of food industry 
wastes and food decontamination with emerging technologies. She is author of several papers in peer-reviewed journals and 
has participated in different national and international conferences. She is currently working as  postdoctoral researcher 
(awarded with a Torres Quevedo Grant since 2014) holding the positions of Coordinator of the Science Area, Lab Responsible 
and WP leader or technical responsible in public and private R&D projects. 
CUAUHTEMOC ARAUJO (Male) Chemometrician. He holds a degree on Physics, a master degree in Material Sciences, and 
a doctorate degree in Applied Sciences. Throughout his scientific career, he conducted research in the fields of materials 
sciences, optical spectroscopies and chemometrics. He has mor e than 20 years of experience working on a wide range of 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 101 
 
 
biological and non-biological applications of vibrational spectroscopies (i.e. Raman, MIR and NIR). He has also worked closely 
with other characterization techniques such as: UV/Vis and fluorescence spectroscopies. 
INMACULADA CAMPOS (Female) Bio-electrochemistry researcher with a background in chemistry, electrochemistry and 
statistical data analysis. I have 7 years of experience developing electrochemical sensors for electronic tongues, using 
statistical data analysis such as PCA, PLS or ANN charted using Matlab and R. Moreover I have two years of experience 
developing and crafting semiconductors biosensors. Hardworking, selfmotivated, excellent team player, with complete ability 
to deliver results under pressure. Familiar with communicating results both in writing and orally at international conferences.  
MEng EDURNE SUÁREZ  (Female) Project and Innovation Manager. Graduated in Industrial Technologies Engineering at 
University of Vigo (UV), Spain, and Msc in Industrial Engineering with specialization in Materials at Polytechnic University of 
Catalunya (UPC-ETSEIB), Spain. Visiting research assistant at Zero Waste Byg group at Technical University of Denmark 
(DTU) working on the valorization of ocean waste as construction materials. Edurne comes from a background in technological 
innovation consultancy, managing and executing research and innovation tasks within multicultural and multidisciplinary teams 
in several European collaborative R&D&i projects (H2020, Interreg) as well as commercial assignments for potential European 
Stakeholder Associations and international RTOs as Suschem and the Nippon Steel & Sumikin Research Institute Corporation, 
in the automotive, energy storage and circular economy fields.  She joined IRIS as Project and Innovation manager, being 
responsible for overall coordination, reporting and quality assurance of EU funded projects in the H2020 framework related to 
the Digital Transformation and Monitoring Solutions. 
 
Five relevant publications, patents or products:   
1. Sensing Technology. Chapter 6. Resource Efficiency of Processing Plants. Monitoring and Improvement.  A. Rosales, O. 
Mc Nerney. Edited by Stefan Krämer and Sebastian Engell. Wiley-Vch. Print ISBN: 978-3-527-34074-3  in press 
2. Commercial Data Mining, Processing, Analysis and Modeling for Predictive Analytics Projects, David Nettleton, Elsiever 
book, ISBN9780124166028, 304p 
3. Towards Automatic Calibration of In-Line Machine Processes, 18th International Conference on Industrial Engineering and 
Manufacturing Process Modeling, D.F.Nettleton, E.Bugnicourt, C. Wasiak, A. Rosales, London, UK, July 28-29, 2016 
4. Hyperspectral imaging. A.A. Gowen, E. Gaston, J. Burger (2014). In: C.P. O´Donnell, C. Fagan, P.J.Cullen (Eds.), Process 
Analytical Technology for the Food Industry, 199-216, Springer, ISBN 978-1-4939-0311-5. 
5. Injection moulding process optimization by online material monitoring. E. Bugnicourt et al., October 2012. Technical article 
in Packaging connections.   
Relevant product line: Cloud-enabled NIR spectroscopy platform for inline and at line process monitoring (Devices engineered 
for harsh environments- IP65 and optionally higher, optional ATEX DC compliance- and proprietary optical probe that maximises 
the interaction between the light and the sample for more accurate measurements).  
Related services: Chemiometrics model development and training  
1. Hypera®-Hyperspectral Imaging (HSI) System for on -line foreign body detection and chemical composition analysis 
(H2020- SMEInst, Grant Agreement no: 726572, 2016 -2018). IRIS is further developing its inline HSI monitoring produ ct 
line and validating it in the food industry.  To date the system has been applied commercially for inline pizza quality 
assessment (topping distribution and absence of plastic flakes). Using HSI, not only the shape or position but also the 
chemical composition and hidden matter can be unveiled. Using Artificial Intelligence algorithms (chemometrics), we convert 
the monitored outputs into meaningful information much beyond that can be obtained with conventional vision systems. Our 
HSI system prevents out-of-spec processes or product recalls.  
2. ProPAT- Robust and affordable process control technologies for improving standards and optimising industrial operations 
(H2020- SPIRE, Grant Agreement no: 637232, 2014-2018). IRIS is leading the development of a global PAT control platform 
integrating novel low cost smart sensors, such as MEMS-NIR spectroscopic and granulometric analysers, which together 
with chemometric tools and predictive software, is being validated to optimise the performance of batch and continuous 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 102 
 
 
processing industries. As initial target appl ications, the milling of minerals, ceramics, metals, mixing and granulation of 
pharma products and polymerization of resins are optimized both in terms of process efficiency, and output quality. 
3. ShareBox- Secure Management Platform for Shared Process Resou rces, Grant Agreement no: 680843, Funding 
programme: H2020 -SPIRE-06-2015. IRIS is developing the central cloud platform that integrates a number of smart 
modules for supporting and optimising synergies in the use of shared resources and waste valorisation between companies. 
Based on agent based modelling (ABM) approach, the supply-demand matching brings Industrial Symbiosis into the 
Industry4.0 paradigm, and allows the shift of industrial users towards the circular economy. 
4. WHEYLAYER- Whey protein -coated pl astic films to replace expensive polymers and increase recyclability. (Grant 
agreement no.: 218340-2 Completed). Followed by WHEYLAYER2- Barrier biopolymers for sustainable packaging (Grant 
Agreement no: 315743 FP7, R4SME, Demonstration action Completed). IRIS participated in the process upscaling and 
optimisation, among other via simulation and monitoring, for multilayer films with improved recyclability by design. 
5. OPTIJECT- A novel spectroscopic instrument for in -line monitoring during injection moulding (FP7, R4SMEs, Grant 
agreement no.: 262623, 2010 -2012). IRIS has implemented NIR and UV -VIS spectroscopy -based in line monitoring 
systems for the polymer melt stream within the nozzle of injection machines. In particular, IRIS delivered probes able  to 
withstand outstandingly high pressure and temperatures up to 350ºC. The system was demonstrated to provide information 
normally only available to plastic converters via laborious off line QC tests like material humidity down to ppm level or 
polymer degradation, as well as to allow optimising colour and colourant concentration in real time. When coupled with case 
based reasoning models, it allows decision support for real time process optimization thereby maximizing yield and 
minimizing the scrap generated. 
IRIS is coordinator in all 
 Technical equipment:   
Spectroscopic Laboratory equipped with several instruments, namely, a FTIR-ATR (Interspectrum), 2 UV-VIS (PerkinElmer and 
Ocean Optics), an Extended -SWIR (StellarNet) and a NIR (Mightex) spectrophotometers as well as a SWIR Hyperspectral 
imager (Specim-Xenics). The associated staff are properly trained and skilled in chemometrics modelling by using a commercial 
suite (SOLO+MIA from Eigenvector) as well as ad hoc non-commercial chemometric tools (Matlab and Python toolboxes). 
Electronics, mechanical and optical workshops and laboratories equipped with up-to-date hardware and tools: signal generators, 
wide band oscilloscopes, PCB design [Altium] and building tools, development kits for progra mming microcontrollers, CNC -
milling machines for electronic and mechanical prototyping, and CAD software [SolidWorks], among others.   
IRIS’ optical engineers work with ZEEMAX software for optimally designing of optical systems and to setup the designs by 
means of advanced optical components and facilities (optical tables, windows, lenses, lasers and light sources and related 
“opticalware”). 
Food and wet chemistry lab equipped with a DSC, a Surface Energy analyser, an HPLC, a Cobb tester, microbiological 
equipments, microspcope and microtome for structural analysis, migration cells, colourimeter (for colour and opacity 
measurement), Ford cup viscometers, water vapour permeation cells, turbidimeter, climatic chambers, manual and automatic 
coaters, electrospray, different drying technologies, plasma surface activation, etc. 
  
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 103 
 
 
PARTNER 19 
Full Name: LEYGATECH S.A.S. 
Web page:  http://www.leygatech.com/ 
Country: France 
Type: SME  
 
Brief description of the organization: 
Leygatech is a French blown film manufacturer company employing 175 peoples with annual turnover of 68M€ and a production 
capacity of 30 000 tons of plastic films. The production is mainly dedicated to the primary food packaging and pharmaceutical 
packaging. Leygatech is an independent company leader in the coextrusion of barrier blown films for packaging market, with 
a high expertise in various resins. Leygatech has also an expertise in biodegradable and biobased films extrusion since years. 
Role and relevance in the project: 
LEYGATECH will be the industrial partner processing the PHA resin in blown film and in bags if needed 
Leygatech has built its excellent technical knowledges in the development of multi -layer barriers film thanks to the 23 blown 
film lines from 1 to 7 layers. The lab is equipped with barrier testing equipment (oxygen and water vapor), mechanical, optics, 
multilayers devices analysis. Through its high level skill and equipment characterization, Leygatech is certified ISO 9001, ISO 
14001 and FSCC 22000. 
The company is extremely proud of its research and development activities and the turnover is directly linked to the investments 
performed in R&D.  Leygatech considers as strength to keep a high degree of innovation to bring new products to the market 
place in this competitive sector. It is an active member of IPC and Plastipolis. 
LEYGATECH knows wells the market and the customer of the biodegradable / biobased films and will be able to introduce the 
new technology to the market through its sales and technical team. 
Technical and Management team:   
Brouillat Jean-Matthiew (M) – R&D Manager 
He has been in Leygatech since 1999. Already 8 collaborative projects managed. 1 patent granted and 2 packaging innovation 
awards. Master of Packaging. 
Jacquier Lucie (F) – R&D Engineer 
Engineer with laboratory skills. Master of Polymer. 
Cuerq François (M) – Production Manager 
Production manager with high skill of the process. Master of Polymer.  
Extrusion and printing team – Operator for Production 
Related publications, patents or products:  
(up to 5) 
- French Patent on a foam film 50µm to reduce the weight per m² 
- French Patent on a breathable biodegradable films to pack fruits & vegetables 
- 4 times winner of the French Oscar de l’Emballage (2014 / 2016 / 2018) 

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 104 
 
 
Related Projects:  
 
Title Date Description URL of the project Funding 
framework – if so 
NOXY II 2015 Micro and nanolayer multilayer 
barrier films 
 ANR 
SUCCIPACK 2013 Succinic acid films development  FUI 
ASPECT 2014 Tie layers development  ANR 
DEFIBAMI 2017 Improvement of barrier resins  FRI Cluster 
PLASMAREC 2018 Nanocharge improved by Plasma 
technology 
 FRI Cluster 
 
Technical equipment: 
 
EQUIPMENT AND INFRASTRUCTURE 
Description Added-value for the project 
Blown film lines up to 7 layers 
Flexo printing equipment 
Bag making equipement 
Biobase or biodegradable films can be produced 
Identification possible 
Production of bag made from the developed PHA film
4.2 Third parties involved in the project 
 
GEACAM 
 
Recently, IRIAF has mandated the personnel management of the CLAMBER Plant to the public company GEACAM. Therefore, 
GEACAM will act as a third party of IRIAF. First of all, it should be noted that the IRIAF is the proprietary of the CLAMBER Plant 
and is in charge of all the costs of the project (reactants, consumables, transport of dig estate, electricity, tap water, gas, etc.) 
except the personnel one, which is shared with GEACAM.  IRIAF personnel is in charge of all the administrative works of the 
project, justification of the project, dissemination, purchasing management, which, as a public organization, is governed by the 
publish procurement law, etc. GEACAM personnel will carry out all the technical works of the project, execution of experiments, 
operation of the different units of the plant, analysis of control samples, industrial maintenance of the equipment, etc.   
 
Key staff at GEACAM who will be involved in carrying out this work: 
 
Juan Jose Gonzalez Ruiz (male) holds a degree in Business Administration and Management from the UCLM with an MBA and 
Advanced Course in Quality Management and Risk Prevention. He has more than eight years of professional experience in 
Prefabricados Ciudad Real, of which 2 years  as Head of the Finance and Contracting Department for the construction of the 
production plant and six years as Head of the Purchasing and Control Production Departments. Throughout this period, he was 
also responsible for the collection and justification of national and European Public Funds. During 2 years and 3 months, he was 
administrator of the CLAMBER Project, working for the IRIAF, where was in charge of the elaboration of bid specifications of 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 105 
 
 
tenders, administrative and countable management of all departments, fund justification, etc. Since March 2017, he is Director of 
the CLAMBER Plant.  
Javier Mena Sanz  (male) is PhD in Chemical Engineering from the UCLM in the field of environment (wastewater treatment, 
anaerobic digestion, composting, waste valorisation, etc.). He has been an assistant professor and researcher at the university 
for three years. Later, he coordinated R+D department in the company Alquimia Soluciones Ambientales for 6 years where 
participated in 13 R+D projects and 8 publications . During 2 years and 5 months, he was plant supervisor of the CLAMBER 
Project, working for the IRIAF, where was in charge of the elaboration of bid specifications of tenders, supervision of the 
construction of the different units of the CLAMBER Plant, supervision of the projects developed by winners of the Pre-commercial 
Public Purchase carried out in the framework of the CLAMBER Project, technical justification of the funds, etc. Since March 2017, 
he is Scientific Coordinator of the CLAMBER Plant. 
Francisco Javier Pinar Pérez (male) is a PhD in Chemical Engineering; he has also worked as a research scientist in the FP7 
EU Project CISTEM (G.A. 325262) determining fuel cell degradation issues, influence of reactant gases as well as corrosion of  
bipolar plate materials. He has also broad experience on proton exchange membrane development and characterization. Besides, 
he has also experience in bio-hydrogen valorization from dark fermentation processes in a HT-PEMFC. Since March 2017, he is 
Technical Manager of the CLAMBER Plant. 
FGUVA 
 
Fundación General de la Universidad de Valladolid (FGUVA) is a non-profit institution fully controlled by Universidad de Valladolid 
(UVa), created in order to handle the administrative and financial tasks of UVA in R&D European projects, including issues related 
to employment and payment of personnel, purchase of equipment, consumables, etc. Therefore, FGUVA will act as a third party 
of UVA. FGUVA’s personnel does not perform technical or scientific work/ tasks in the project. The contribution of FGUVA is free 
of charge and always used under the premises of UVA. 
 
PNO 
 
PNO is a private for-profit consultancy. PNO is a third party providing in kind contributions against payment in form of seconded 
personnel for BCM. Terms and conditions were agreed between BCM and PNO in a secondment agreement on 4th July 2017. 
BCM and PNO agreed to realize the contribution to WP7 and WP8 together, based on a clear work division and supervised by 
BCM, as full beneficiary.  
 
The contribution of PNO to the project is necessary for BCM and the project for the following reasons:  
− BCM suffered a re-organisation process in 2017 and did not have enough human resources to develop the tasks committed. 
The main person at BCM, who initiated the participation at URBIOFIN, left the company and BCM had to look for a reliable solution 
to fulfill its tasks within the project.  
− To deliver the same high -quality results (in line with the needs of the project) BCM decided to get PNO on board. PNO is an 
acknowledged innovation and funding agency with many years of experience in conducting Dissemination and Exploitation tasks 
and working in EU projects.  
 
The following employees are announced as seconded personnel from PNO to BCM: Ms Annemarie Reiche, Ms Ariane Waldmann, 
Mrs Barbara Bendaoud and Ms Carolin Schneider. The personnel may change during the project depending on their availability. 
PNO charge BCM on a monthly basis for the services made, invoicing the actual costs of the seconded employees. PNO and 
BCM agreed on telework to execute the services. Therefore, the employees perform their work at the premises of PNO in Leipzig 
or Düsseldorf, Germany. 
 
5. ETHICS ISSUES
5.1 Ethics 
 
Within the URBIOFIN project no ethics issues have been identified. 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 106
5.2 Security 
 
Please indicate if your project will involve: 
- Activities or results raising security issues: (NO) 
- “EU-classified information” as background or results: (NO) 
 
 
 
  
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 107 
 
 
6. ADDENDUM 1. BUSINESS CASES 
 
BIOETHANOL as Building block 
 
1. Value proposition. 
Ethanol is a colourless, volatile, flammable liquid produced by yeast fermentation of carbohydrates, or synthetically, by hydration 
of ethylene. It is used chiefly as a transport fuel or fuel additive (replacing fossil gasoline), with other applications bei ng used as 
heating fuel, a solvent , a chemical industry feedstock, and in beverages, antiseptics and medicines. Bioethanol is the largest 
biofuel with an estimated worldwide production of 100 billion litres in 2013, and with an expected production of 150 billion litres in 
202063.  The growing market for bioethanol as a biofuel has also been accompanied by an increasingly interest as a useful 
platform molecule for the production of value-added chemicals (Figure 6.1). 
Bioethanol is mainly produced by yeast fermentation of sugar-rich and starch-rich biomass like sugarcane (Brazil), maize (North 
America) or cereals (Europe). The industrial production of ethanol from second -generation lignocellulose biomass is rapidly 
developing, with many projects being developed in the US and EU. 
 
 
Figure 6.1. Ethanol as chermical building block (adapted from ref.64) 
 
2. Existing alternatives 
93% of total ethanol produced worldwide comes from bio based methods (yeast fermentation), while only 7% is fossil ethanol 
(catalytic hydration of ethylene)65. 
 
 
3. Price per unit 
Market price evolution of ethanol during last year is shown in Figure 6.2.  
 
63 (OECD-FAO, 2014) http://ethanolproducer.com/articles/11264/oecd-fao-outlook-report-predicts-growth-in-ethanol-production 
64 http://www.e4tech.com/project/from-the-sugar-platform-to-biofuels-and-biochemical/  
65 http://www.e4tech.com/project/from-the-sugar-platform-to-biofuels-and-biochemical/  

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 108 
 
 
 
Figure 6.2. Ethanol price evolution in 2015-2016 period (Values in US $/GAL)66. 
 
4. Amount that will be feasible per year with the upgraded pilot plan. 
Bioethanol from MSW can be feasible in installations treating 40,000 – 50,000 tonnes of MSW per year, depending mainly of the 
OFMSW quality, and the bioethanol yields obtained in the process (around 100 -130 liters of bioethanol from tonne of dry MSW 
tonne). 
 
5. Market segment 
Main current use of bioethanol is as transport biofuel or fuel additive for gasoline. Bioethanol has also been used in the beverage 
industry and as renewable chemical building block for the production of ethylene, propylene, diethyl ether , 1,3 -butadiene, 
acetaldehyde, ethyl acetate, etc.67 (Figure 6.3). 
 
 
Figure 6.3. Worldwide production and use of ethanol68 
 
6. Market size 
Global bioethanol market volume was 100 billion litres in 201469. 
 
7. Growth rate 
It is expected a bioethanol production of 150 billion litres in 202070, which means an increase of 50% compared to current market 
volumes.  
 
8. Market trends 
Currently bioethanol is produced from edible biomass, mainly from sugar in Brazil and starch in USA (Figure 6.4). 
 
66 http://www.tradingeconomics.com/commodity/ethanol/forecast  
67 Sun,J and Wang, Y,. Recent advances in catalytic conversion of ethanol to chemicals. ACS Catalysis. 2014, 4, 1078−1090 
68 Angelici, C.; Weckhuysen, B. M.; Bruijnincx, P. C. A.; ChemSusChem 2013, 6, 1595. 
69 http://www.e4tech.com/project/from-the-sugar-platform-to-biofuels-and-biochemical/ 
70 (OECD-FAO, 2014) http://ethanolproducer.com/articles/11264/oecd-fao-outlook-report-predicts-growth-in-ethanol-production 

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 109 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.4. Production of bioethanol per country or region in 2013 71. 
 
However, due to the competition with food and concerns about ecological systems, recent research has shifted towards bioethanol 
production from non-food biomass feedstocks (lignocellullosic materials from agricultural, industrial and urban wastes), which are 
low cost and abundantly available sources. Second generation lignocellulosic ethanol is near commercialisation, with first -of-a-
kind commercial plants built or currently under construction, and is therefore within the scope of the study, although a great deal 
is known about this industry already, and therefore less effort is afforded it compared to more novel pathways to different f uels 
and chemicals.  
 
9. Barriers and risks 
The main bar riers facing bioethanol production are: the high cost and energy use in product separation, the stability of yeast 
strains and the low productivity due to substrate/product inhibition and slow degradation of substrates. These barriers have been 
mitigated by the latest advances in the use of more efficient downstream processing techniques, new strains with improved 
stability and higher productivities and the efficient integration of pre-treatment with fermentation steps72. 
 
10. Business approach 
IMECAL and CIEMAT have developed a biotechnological patented technology (European Patent EPO 2112226, USA Patent 
8399228 B2 and international PCT WIPO 099038) for obtaining second generation bioethanol from OFMSW (PERSEO 
Bioethanol®). The commercialization rights belong to IMECAL. The bioethanol obtained, currently used as a biofuel, will be used 
as chemical building block for the conversion to bioethylene and subsequent polymerisation to bioPE. 
 
 
BIO ETHYLENE  
 
1. Value proposition. 
Ethylene is primarily a monomer used as a feedstock in the manufacture of polymer plastics, fibers and other organic chemicals 
that are ultimately consumed in the packaging, transportation and construction industries and in a multitude of industrial an d 
consumer markets. Nondurable or consumable end uses —in particular, packaging —make up more than half of ethylene 
derivative consumption worldwide. One plastic resin in particular, polyethylene (PE), accounts for the majority of ethylene 
consumption. Ethylene is one of the largest -volume chemicals worldwide 73, with a diverse derivative portfolio, including 
nondurable and durable end uses (Figure 6.5). 
 
 
71 http://ethanolrfa.org/pages/World-Fuel-Ethanol-Production  
72 http://www.e4tech.com/project/from-the-sugar-platform-to-biofuels-and-biochemical/ 
73 https://www.ihs.com/products/ethylene-chemical-economics-handbook.html 

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 110 
 
 
 
Figure 6.5. Derivative chemicals and polymers from ethylene (adapted from ref. 74) 
 
2. Existing alternatives 
Fossil ethylene is derived from either modifying natural gas (a methane, ethane, propane mix) or from the catalytic cracking of 
crude oil75. Ethylene from renewable raw materials (bio-ethylene) is made by catalytic dehydratation of bio-ethanol76. Producing 
ethylene from bioethanol is the only commercial solution for biobased and sustainable downstream production. 
 
3. Price per unit 
In India and Brazil, where bioethanol feedstocks (typically sugarcane) are relatively inexpensive and easily accessib le, bio -
ethylene production costs are closer to fossil ones. In Brazil and India they are typically 1,200 $/tonne bio-ethylene, and in China 
(using sweet sorghum feedstocks) are around 1,700 $/tonne. In the United States, bioethylene costs (from corn) are reported at 
about 2,000 $/tonne, and in Europe (from sugar beet) around 2,600 $/tonne. Lignocellulose -based bio-ethylene production is 
estimated at 1,900-2,000 $/tonne in the US77. 
 
4. Amount that will be feasible per year with the upgraded pilot plant. 
Bioethylene can be feasible in any capacity. However, it depends on the comparison to petroleum based ethylene price, and 
economy of scale has to be taken into account. In general, capacities over 40  KTA are mostly successful and feasible plants, 
depending on the downstream products78. 
 
5. Market segment 
Ethylene is mainly used as a monomer for the production of plastics: PE, PET, PEG, PVC and PS. PE, the largest ethylene 
derivative market, accounted for over 60% of global ethylene consumption in 201479. Markets include film, packaging, containers 
and articles for home and light industrial use. The next-largest derivative market is ethylene oxide for ethylene glycol used primarily 
to produce PET (used in polyethylene terephthalate fibers, bottles and other goods). In 2014, ethylene oxide accounts for 15% of 
total world consumption. Ethylene dichloride (primarily for vinyl chloride and polyvinyl chloride resin) accounted for 10% of  the 
 
74 http://www.e4tech.com/project/from-the-sugar-platform-to-biofuels-and-biochemical/ 
75 http://nzic.org.nz/ChemProcesses/polymers/10J.pdf 
76 http://www.braskem.com.br/site.aspx/green-products-USA 
77http://www.irena.org/DocumentDownloads/Publications/IRENAETSAP%20Tech%20Brief%20I13%20Production_of_Bio-ethylene.pdf 
78 Data from GI Dynamics  
79 https://www.ihs.com/products/ethylene-chemical-economics-handbook.html 

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 111 
 
 
world ethylene market in 2014. Apart from its use as monomer for plastics, ethylene has also been used as fruit ripening agent in 
agriculture80. 
  
6. Market size 
Total worldwide production of ethylene was 127 million tons in 2014, being one of the most consumed chemicals 81. Figure 6.6 
shows world consumption of ethylene per region. 
 
 
Figure 6.6. World consumption of ethylene per region (2014)82 
 
Braskem is the first commercial producer of bioethylene from bioethanol, utilising Brazil’s traditional strengths in producing 
large volumes of low cost sugarcane ethanol for transport. The ethylene produced is processed directly to bioPE83. Annual 
bioethylene production capacity is up to 200 ktpa84. 
  
7. Growth rate 
During 2009–2014, world ethylene consumption grew at an average rate of almost 4.5% per year, while capacity increased at a 
slower rate of about 3.5%. Ethylene consumption is expected to grow at about 4% per year over the next five years. Capacity 
additions will match this growth85. 
The global production capacity of bio-based ethylene to produce bioPE is estimated to be able to reach 840 ktonnes by 2020 86, 
quadrupling current capacities.  
The improved GHG and fossil energy use performance of bio-based PE, together with increasing focus on sustainability and more 
stringent environmental regulations and targets, is anticipated to drive demand for bio-based ethylene. 
 
8. Market trends 
Bioethylene has so far been successfully produced in Brazil, where ethanol is relatively inexpensive and easily available. Cheaper 
production of second generation bioethanol from alternative sources (lignocellulosic ethanol from industrial, agricultural and urban 
wastes) is expected to expand the bioethylene production market to different regions.  
When it comes to bio-plastics (the biggest end use of bio-ethylene), according to BCCC research the market size will grow from 
$387.6 billion in 2013, to $700.7 billion in 2018. Demand for biobased products is growing due to: 
- Corporate social responsibility 
- Sustainability by manufacturers 
- Petroleum dependency 
- Environmental responsibility 
- Demand for renewable 
- Brand value 
 
 
 
 
80 http://www.frontlineservices.com.au/Frontline_Services/Fruit_ripening_gas_-_ethylene.html 
81 http://www.e4tech.com/project/from-the-sugar-platform-to-biofuels-and-biochemical/ 
82 https://www.ihs.com/products/ethylene-chemical-economics-handbook.html 
83 http://sperecycling.org/sites/sperecycling.org/files/papers/GPEC2013/l2peoples.pdf   
84 http://www.braskem.com/site.aspx/Im-greenTM-Polyethylene   
85 https://www.ihs.com/products/ethylene-chemical-economics-handbook.html 
86 Nova Institute (2013) “Market Developments of and Opportunities for biobased products and chemicals” 

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 112 
 
 
9. Barriers and risks 
Barriers and risks to the bio-based ethylene market expanding are associated with the bioPE market, since it is the main derivative 
product (see bioPE business case). 
 
10. Business approach 
Bioethylene will be produced from catalytic dehydration of second generation bioethanol from OFMSW. In this case the business 
model is based on the technology licensing for the catalytic conversion from bioethanol to bioethylene. Bioethylene will be u sed 
to produce bioPE and also as a fruit ripening agent.  IP rights on the associated technologies will belong to IMECAL (bioethanol 
from MSW) and GI dynamics (Bioehylene technology). 
 
 
MEDIUM-CHAIN FATTY ACIDS (C8-C14) AS BUILDING BLOCK 
 
1. Value proposition. 
Medium-chain fatty acids with carbon chain lengths varying from 8 to 14 have a broad range of applications as lubricants, creams, 
soaps, antimicrobials, and edible oils. They are not constituents of fossil fuels and relative complicated chemic al processes are 
needed to make them from longer-chain fatty acids. Coconut and palm kernel oil are the natural sources for these fatty acids with 
coconut oil consisting for almost 50% of lauric acid (C12), 16% myristic acid (C14), 8% decanoic acid (C10) and 7% caprylic acid 
(C8). Both coconut and palm are under extreme pressure as source for these MCFA’s because of their additional use as food 
materials (competition for food) and their high impact on the environment (land/water use, agricultural waste). Alternative sources 
that can be produced using more sustainable technologies, such as yeast and microalgae, are in increasing demand. 
Caprylic acid is a strong antimicrobial/antifungal and is died as ingredient to soaps and cosmetic preparations exactly for that 
purpose 
Decanoic acid, as sodium salt, is widely applied in soap. In addition is used in perfumes, lubricants and plastics. 
Lauric acid is mainly applied as cleansing agent (soap) because of its surfactant properties and strong antimicrobial activity. 
Myristic acid is applied, usually as ester, in cosmetics as a surfactant, cleansing, opacifying and thickening agent.       
 
2. Existing alternatives 
Nowadays, coconut oil and palm kernel oil are the major sources for lauric acid. Myristic acid is isolated f rom coconut, nutmeg 
and babassu palm. Caprylic acid and ecanoic acid are isolated from coconut oil and goat milk fat. The major end-users of these 
MCFA’s are large Food, Personal Care and Chemical companies such as Unilever, Proctor & Gamble, AKZONobel and Mitsui. 
  
3. Price per unit 
Caprylic acid is sold for prices ranging from 3 to 12 $ kg-1 depending on its purity and application (in cosmetics/soaps or foods). 
Decanoic acid is generally sold in the price range of 4-6 $ kg-1 to the flavour and fragrance industry. 
Lauric acid market price varies from 3 € kg-1 for detergent application to 5-10 € kg-1 for cosmetic application to > 20 € kg-1 for food 
application. 
Myristic acid market price varies from 3-5 € kg-1 for applications in skin oil to over 10 € kg-1 for food applications. 
 
4. Market segment 
Caprylic acid is widely used in the cosmetic, food and feed industry for its antimicrobial activity. 
Decanoic acid is applied in the chemical industry for its lubrication properties, but also in the cosmetic industry as lubricant but 
also because of its flavour properties. 
Lauric acid, as sodium salt, is soap and as such is applied in most detergents, soaps and other cleansing agents used in the 
Home & Personal Care and Cosmetic industry. It is also m ore-and-more applied as antimicrobial ingredient in Food & Feed 
Industry. 
Myristic acid is mostly applied in the Cosmetic Industry as a surfactant, cleansing, opacifying and thickening agent.  Has also 
emulsifying properties. 
 
5. Market size 
The total fatty acid market size is expected to hit 12 ,000 M€ in 2017, about 40% of this market in the personal care (detergent, 
soap, cosmetics) sector. The current market size for caprylic acid is approximately 2.5 M€. The market size for decanoic acid is 
approximately 50 M€, for lauric acid approximately 2,000 M€ and for myristic acid approximately 600 M€. 
 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 113 
 
 
6.   Growth rate 
The fatty acid market size is expected to double in the next 5-6 years in both the cosmetic and food applications. 
 
7. Market trends 
Growth of coconut and palm trees for its production of fatty acids/oils is steadily growing in tropical countries. This has resulted in 
massive reduction of natural tropical forest areas and general negative sentiment about consumer products based on these crops. 
Alternative sources such as (micro-)algae and also several production processes based on synthetic biology/genetic engineering 
are rapidly penetrating the market.  
 
8. Barriers and risks 
The main barrier for the microbial MCFA market is the price difference with the coconut/palm-derived fatty acids.  
 
9. Business approach 
MCFA’s will be isolated from microalgae used for CO2/NH3-stripping of the biogas and by growth of various Cryptococcus variants 
on the VFA produced by the anaerobic digesters.  
 
 
PHA 
 
1. Value proposition  
The high value of the PHA is based not only in the bioBased  production process itself, but also in its biodegradable nature, as 
seen in following picture (Figure 6.7). Biobased polymers such as PHA are generally more sustainable materials than their 
petrochemical-based counterparts,  and,  as  previously  mentioned,  they can  be  produced  from  a  wide  range  of  renewable 
resources. 
 
 
Figure 6.7.  Procedure and biodegradability of plastic materials 
 
 
Additionally, the PHAs represent the only class of thermoplastic polymers which are converted directly by microorganisms from 
feedstock without necessity of additional polymerisation steps. Moreover due to its characteristics the PHAs can replace some of 
the most common fossil-fuel plastics, such as: PET (Polyethylene terephthalate), LDPE (Low Density Polyethylene), HDPE (High 
Density Polyethylene), and PP (Polypropylene) such is consider in the image below from Lund et al. These four types of plastics 
currently represent more than 50% of worldwide plastics production (as depicted in Figure 6.8).  
 

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 114 
 
 
 
Figure 6.8. Potential replacement for PHA of the current plastics 
 
2. Existing alternatives  
The sustainable sourcing of feedstock is a prerequisite for more sustainable products. This is the main objective of PHA production 
in this project, since normally typical PHA comes from food competing source such as the use of corn fields for the production of 
starch as raw material for polymers. Negative impacts caused by bad agricultural practice must be avoided, mainly when apply 
social criteria and human rights. T he environmental impact of plastic production should be also avoided; therefore the other 
alternative to produce PHA coming from fossil fuels is not a good choice.  
Regarding prices the PHA costs from residual streams can be reduced in order to make the process more competitive with these 
not desired alternatives, mainly respect to the plastic produced by crude oil with a market price around 1.1 kg crude oil kf-1 polymer. 
 
3. Price per unit  
Depending on which bacterial producer is used to generate PHA, the cost of production can range from $4-$16 per kg. 
However, the price should be $3-$5 per kg to be commercially viable. 
The objective in this project is: 
- 8-9 € kg-1 for mcl-PHA 
- 4-5 € kg-1 for scl-PHA 
Since the future market for mcl-PHA allow higher prices. 
 
4. Amount that will be feasible per year with the upgraded pilot plan  
The bioplastic produced from module 2, coming from VFA of the first stage of AD will represent around 0.5 ton per year. 
For module 3, bioplastic coming from biomethane, the product obtained will be 0.5 ton per year. 
 
5. Market segment  
The actual market segments of PHA consist in flexible packagings and mulch films (used in blends), and some niche markets in 
consumer goods (cosmetic packagings, horticulture pots, biodegradable cutlery, etc.). The most representative PHAs are 
polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB) and poly -hydroxy valerate (PHV) and its copolymer (PHBV), with physical properties similar to 
polyethylene and polypropylene. 
In both markets, besides its physical properties, PHA provides biodegradability. This is particularly adapted to these market s 
where the product shelf -life is low. In particular in  the case of mulch films, a major advantage arises in this case in addition to 
having the advantages of a traditional plastic film: after use there is no need of collecting the film as it will degrade in soil. 
 
 
 
6. Market size  

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 115 
 
 
Bioplastics are generating increasing interest for industries and their market is rising as a result of technological advances and 
cost reductions. 
In 2014, the global production capacities of bioplastics amounted to 1.7 million tons. This translates to approximately 680,0 00 
hectares of land.  
The key players in the PHA market are Biomatera, Biomer, Bio -On SROL, Kaneka corporation, Meredian Ins., Metabolix Inc, 
Newlight Technologies, LIC, PHA industrial S.A., Polyferm Canada Inc., Shenzhen Ecomann Biotech Co Ltd, Tianan Biologic 
Materials Co and Tianiin Greenbio Materials Co Ltd. The global capacity in 2014 by segments is showed in the Figure below. 
 
 
 
Figure 6.9. Global production capacities of bioplastics 2014 
 
PHA could be used in various applications, but the targeted markets in the project are flexible packaging, consumer goods and 
agriculture/horticulture. The actual potential market size can  then be estimated at around 80,000 tons: 35, 000 tons in flexible 
packaging (partial substitution of PLA and PLA blends, starch blen ds and other biodegradable), 35, 000 tons in 
agriculture/horticulture (partial substitution of starch-blends) and 10,000 tons in consumer goods. Due to their properties, scl-and 
mcl- PHA should in particular be a good substitute to PBAT, a fossil-based biopolymer currently used for improving softness and 
processability of starch-based and PLA-based blends. PBAT has today a global p roduction capacity of around 80,000 tons per 
year. 
 
7. Growth rate  
The growth rate from 2014 to 2019 expected can be seen in next Figure. It is expected a growth in PHA market from 32 to 104 
Mton, mainly related to flexible or rigid packaging and agriculture purposes.  
 

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 116 
 
 
 
Figure 6.10. Growth rate of biodegradable bioplastics markets from 2014 to 2019. 
 
8. Market trends  
Rising demand of biodegradable materials, positive attitude of governments towards green procurement policies, and rising oil  
prices are attracting companies to invest in PHA (Polyhydroxyalkanoate) market. Many large companies such as Meredian (U.S.), 
Ecomann (China), and Bio-on (Italy) are focusing on increasing production capacities. Europe is expected to be the one of the 
largest PHA market over the next six years. Gaining importance of  biodegradable plastics coupled with regulatory support is 
expected to favor market growth in Europe. Asia Pacific would emerge as a promising market in the near future. Low production 
cost as compare to North America and Europe coupled with application growth in agriculture, food & beverage and cosmetics in 
China and India is expected to have a positive impact on PHA market in the near future. 
 
9. Barriers and risks  
The main barrier is the price difference betwee n fossil and bio-based polymers, and competition with other bio-based polymers 
such as starch-based blends and PBAT in flexible packaging and agriculture/horticulture, and PLA in consumer goods. PHA here 
produced will have however some significant advantages against other biobased polymers: a non-food competing and sustainable 
resource, and an increased biodegradability. 
 
10. Business approach 
PHA will be produced by VFAs coming from the partial AD of OFMSW, as well as from the biogas coming from the second step 
of AD process. In this case the business model is based on the technology licensing for both modules 2 and 3 with the IP rights 
belonging to URBASER, IRIAF, WR, AINIA and Nature Plast. 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITE BIOMATERIALS 
 
1. Value proposition. 
Composite materials as used f.i in the construction, automotive and chemical industries, combine attributes from two of more 
different materials in one combined application. Examples are the combination of (bio -)plastics with natural materials/fibers 
coming from wood, wheat or starch. This, generally, leads to materials that combine the attributes of plastics (strength, low price, 
high T-tolerance) and the appearance, feel and smell of natural materials. A good example is WPC (Wood Plastic Composites) 
which has a current market value of 4,000 M€ per year and combines wood fibre with PE, PP or PVC. Within the 100% biobased 
solutions, combination of PLA, PHA, cellulose fibres and algae biomass are examples of composites e.g. used in 3D-color print 
applications. By replacing PE and other plastics by biobased alternatives as offered in this project, new 100% biobased solutions 
will also be offered for the bulk composite applications.   
 

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 117 
 
 
2. Existing alternatives 
The current plastics used in composite materials – PE, PVC, PP, PBS – are all fossil-fuel based. They are generally (much) lower 
in price than the biobased alternatives. 
 
3. Price per unit 
The price would depend completely on the type of materials used for the composite and its application (1 0 € kg-1). E.g. WPC is 
cheaper than 100% wood materials. 
 
4. Amount that will be feasible per year with the upgraded pilot plant. 
Within the UrBioFin-project, we will be producing sufficient composite materials based on PE, PHA, cellulose and lignin to develop 
various biobased packaging solutions for cosmetics and also various plastic bag-prototypes with different flexibilities. 
 
5. Market segment 
PE is widely used in the automotive industry, cosmetics manufactory, packaging (plastic bags, films, containers), toys, pe rsonal 
hygiene and cleaning products. The composite materials based on PE and natural fibres (cellulose, wood fibre/lignin, etc) are  
forming a rapidly growing market with a market value for WPC alone of 4,000 M € per year. 
 
6. Market size 
The total packaging market in Europe is approximately 130 billion €. Over 50% of this market is biobased (paper, board, wood) 
and 31% is plastic. The major plastic packaging material is PE -based (56%) for mostly films, wraps, and bags but also some 
bottles and containers (HD-PE) and smaller amounts of PP (19%), PET (11%), PS (10%) and PVC (4%) are used.  
In 2012, in the Netherlands, only 1 ktonne of bioplastic (0.036%) was used.  
For packaging, very few composite materials are currently available. However the possibilities are  extremely high since 
composites potentially can combine the favourable attributes of various compounds, e.g. the light weight and strength of plastic 
with the abundant availability and flexibility of paper and board. 
 
7. Growth rate 
The growth rate of biobased packaging materials is expected to be very high in the next 10 years, with EU -legislation restricting 
the use of fossil-based plastic bags in Supermarkets, etc.    
 
8. Market trends 
Bio-based PE has so far been successfully produced only in Brazil, due to the presence of large quantities of low cost feedstock 
(with Brazil the leading producer of sugar cane ethanol globally). Cheaper production of second generation bioethanol from 
alternative sources (lignocellulosic ethanol from industrial, agricultural and urban wastes) is expected to expand the PE production 
market to different regions.  
 
9. Barriers and risks 
The main barrier to the bio-based PE market expanding is the price difference between fossil and bio-based. This is partially due 
to externalisation of environmental costs for fossil products, and internalising these costs (for example via green VAT or a carbon 
tax) could reduce the price difference with fossil PE and make bio-based PE a more competitive product. Further incentive, in the 
form of volatile crude oil prices together with limited supply, had opened a market gap for bio-based chemicals at large including 
bio-based PE. In addition to cost competitiveness, there are also uncertainties which may hamper bio -based PE deplo yment. 
These include feedstock availability concerns (where raw materials such as sugarcane are also widely used in other industries), 
and competition with other competing bio-based packaging polymers such as PET, PLA and PEF87. 
 
10. Business approach 
Bio-PE will be produced by polymerisation of bioethylene coming from dehydration of second generation bioethanol from OFMSW. 
The s cl-PHA will be produced using existing mixed culture fermentation and fed with the VFA -fraction from the anaerobic 
fermentor and mcl-PHA will be produced by fermentation of Pseudomonas putida using MCFA deriving from the elongation 
fermentor as feed. Composite materials will be developed/manufactured by the Biomaterial research group of WR. Bio-PE, mcl-
PHA and s cl-PHA and various  natural materials present in the MSW (cellulose, lignin) will be blended/extruded in various 
applications. 
 
87 http://www.grandviewresearch.com/industry-analysis/bio-based-polyethylene-pe-market 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 118 
 
 
BIOMETHANE 
 
1. Value proposition. 
Natural gas (NG) plays nowadays an important role in energy provision in the EU countries to meet the demand for heat, energy 
and transport fuels. NG is a fossil based fuel which significantly contributes to greenhouse gas emissions and to the depletion of 
finite resources. In this sense, biomethane is an attractive renewable alternative that can be used as a substitute for transport 
fuels or energy production, or even as feedstock to obtain chemicals and added value products. Biomethane can be obtained 
from the upgrading of biogas. In this process, other gases contained in the biogas apart from CH 4 (CO2, H2S, VOCs, siloxanes, 
etc.) are removed in order to meet the required standards for its injection into natural gas grid.  
Despite the advantages and future prospects of biomethane, key hotspots to guarantee the sustainability of the process have 
been identified in the biomethane value chain. Among them, the feedstock for biogas production and provision and the conversion 
process of biogas to biomethane (which still represents ~25-30% of the total biomethane costs) will be addressed in URBIOFIN 
project.   
 
2. Existing alternatives 
EU energy consumption is nowadays mainly covered with fossil based fuels. For instance, from the 1683 Mtoe consumed in 2012 
in inland countries, crude oil and petrol products represented 33.8% and the share of natural gas was 23.4%. The other two main 
contributors to the total consumption were solid fuels (17.5%) and nuclear energy (13.5%)88. 
 
3. Price per unit 
Natural gas is currently sold at 0.3-0.4 € m-3, approximately 50% lower than the actual price of biomethane (~0.6 € m-3). The main 
contributors to biomethane price (including operational and capital costs of the supply chain) are the cost of raw biogas production 
and the upgrading costs, with a lower share of the distribution and refuelling stations1. 
 
4. Amount that will be feasible per year with the upgraded pilot plant. 
In the prototype photobioreactor, an average algal biomass productivity of 11 -13 g m -2d-1 is expected. Based on previous 
experimental results from the UVA research group, 12 Nm3 of biogas will be daily upgraded to biomethane.  
 
5. Market segment 
The potential uses of biomethane are similar to those of natural gas: production of power and heat, direct use as automotive fuel, 
and feedstock for the production of many different products (paints, plastics, detergents, etc.). 
 
6. Market size 
About 3.8 × 10 11 m3 of natural gas were used in 2014 for primary energy consumption. In contrast, current production of 
biomethane accounts for 1.4 Bn m 3, of which only 10% is used in transport. Therefore , there is a potential market available for 
biomethane as a substitute of natural gas. 
 
7. Growth rate 
According to the European Biogas Association, in 2014 there were 367 biomethane plants in Europe, of which 70% injected to 
natural gas grids. These plants e xhibit a biomethane upgrading capacity of 200,000 Nm 3 h-1, producing yearly ~ 1.4 Bn m 3 of 
biomethane.This biomethane upgraded from biogas represents a very low percentage of the total biogas production (only 2% of 
the total biogas was upgraded in 2010), however recent estimations from the European Biogas Association revealed that about 
37.5 % of the total production of biogas will be upgraded to biomethane in 2030 (18 Bn m 3) and used for grid injection and fuel. 
The advantages of this product in terms of e nergy sustainability and reduction of GHG emissions will certainly contribute to the 
growth of the European biomethane market.  
 
8. Market trends 
So far, biogas upgrading is mainly undertaken in Europe, with minor upgrading activities in the USA or South Kore a89. The 
biomethane production market is expected to expand promoted by a cheaper conversion of the biogas obtained from OMSW to 
biomethane. This expansion will be especially significant in those countries with a good natural gas infrastructure, where th e 
integration of biomethane into the existing energy system will be relatively easy. 
 
88 http://ec.europa.eu/energy/sites/ener/files/documents/2014_energy_market_en.pdf 
89 http://www.bioenergytrade.org/downloads/t40-t37-biomethane-2014.pdf 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 119 
 
 
 
9. Barriers and risks 
Potential limiting factors and risks associated to biomethane include different sections of the biomethane value chain. One of the 
main concerns is the use of feedstock for energetic purposes, and many biogas plants are located on farms with little economic 
advantages for biogas upgrading. URBIOFIN propose the use of OMSW for biogas production and subsequent upgrading, thus 
ensuring the sustainability of the feedstock. Moreover, the upgrading system, based on a biological photosynthetic process, will 
provide additional treatment of the digestate thus reducing the environmental impacts of this waste. The low economic efficiency 
of the biomethane mainly assoc iated to biogas production and upgrading costs also hinder the actual competitiveness of 
biomethane as a substitute of natural gas. The approach here proposed will significantly reduce the costs entailed by the cleaning 
process by substituting current physical-chemical upgrading technologies with cost-efficient biological methods.  
 
10. Business approach 
Biogas will be first produced by anaerobic digestion of OMSW, and further upgraded to biomethane by a photosynthetic based 
technology to reach the required quality for its use as automotive fuel. The model business is based on the technology licensing 
for the upgrading of biogas to a biomethane that can be used as a non -fossil fuel substituting natural gas.  Intellectual property 
rights on the associa ted technologies belong to Universidad de Valladolid and Urbaser, the terms defined in the Consortium 
agreement. 
 
 
SOLID AND LIQUID BIOFERTILISERS 
 
1. Value proposition. 
The URBIOFIN is based on the recovery of waste materials, (OFMSW in this case with an estimated annual generation in the EU 
of  100,000,000 t per year), using the downstream intermediate and final products from bioEthanol annd bioMethane producion. 
Stabilised organic matter solid fraction from End-of-Waste separate collection, can be an excellent raw material for elaboration of 
substrates, organic fertilisers and biofertilisers, with the requirements of no impurities and pollutants present, low conductivity, no 
re-fermentation and temperature rise episodes.  
In this case, thanks to the expertise of different partners (NOVO, AINIA, BPE, WR, others) it is proposed the development of a 
line of solid biofertilisers that will be produced, characterised, tested in laboratory, greenhouse and field and throughly evaluated. 
These segment of solid biofertilisers is more competitive with traditional mineral and organo -mineral fertilisers, with greater size  
but lower value added. 
Inoculants, as selected bacteria strains will be sup plied inside URBIOFIN partners or thans to the cooperation and commercial 
links established by the Task leader, BPE, with different companies and research centres.    
Regarding liquid biofertilisers, microalgae grown on AD liquid and gaseous streams will be used as protein source for aminoacids 
production via hydrolysis, to be used as main component of liquid biofertilisers. Additives and or inoculants could also be added 
for specific formulations and designed products. Liquid biofertilisers in general and based in aminoacid and peptids in particular, 
are a fast growing but smaller market but with much higher value added products, designated typically for fertigation and fruit and 
vegetables intensive crops. 
 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 120 
 
 
 
Figure 6.11. Biofertilisers global market share 
 
2. Existing alternatives 
In the biofetilisers market there is already a growing group of companies offering their products to the market. The market is very 
disperse and together with the lack of regulation, the situation has been favourable to the rapid spreading of small and innovative 
companies offering their products, normally diverse from case to case and difficult to compare. 
In the specific case of liquid fertilisers composed of aminoacids and/or polypeptides instead the market has been developing for 
the last 40 years, and there are many medium size and big companies offering this type of product, some of them departing from 
macroalgae and sea weeds, many of them based in Asia. Some of the international market leading companies are the following1: 
- Gujarat State Fertilizers & Chemicals Ltd. (India),  
- Novozymes A/S (Denmark),   
- Rizobacter Argentina S.A. (Argentina),  
- Camson Bio Technologies Limited (India),  
- Lallemand Inc. (Canada),  
- National Fertilizers Limited (India),  
- Madras Fertilizers Limited (India),  
- T. Stanes & Company Limited (India),  
- Rashtriya Chemicals & Fertilizers Ltd. (India), and  
- Nutramax Laboratories Inc. (U.S.) 
 
3. Price per unit 
Prices for the s olid and liquid formulation will depend on its formulation and evaluation of the ir agricultural effects, yet to be 
demonstrated in this case. 
For previous calculations the prices that have been assigned to the new bioproducts are in line with similar products already  
present in the market. 
Solid dry granules biofertiliser price has been estimated in 0.35 € t-1. 
Liquid aminoacids biofertiliser price has been estimated in 6 € L-1 or kg-1. 
  
4. Amount that will be feasible per year with the upgraded pilot plan. 
Production of solid and liquid biofertilisers will be a sideline  of the “OFMSW to Bioethanol” demo plant. Production of these 
products will be performed at “Algodor R&D&I and Experimental Production Centre” in Toledo Spain. The capacity of production 
in this Centre is about 2,500 t onnes per year of solid biofertilisers. Capacity for production of Liquid biofertilisers is about 1,000 
tonnes per year, but could easily be increased in ca se of necessity, although the limiting factor for the capacity production in 
URBIOFIN project will be the production of microalgae in the photobioreactor for biomethane upgrading set up at URBASER 
research and development centre in Zaragoza, so a bigger installation for microalgae production at low cost should be 
implemented in this case. 
5. Market segment 

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 121 
 
 
Biofertilizers also known as “plant pr obiotics”, by its favourable effects through the interaction between microorganisms, plants 
and the environment  represent a segment of agricultural inputs (seeds, agri-chemicals, pesticides, etc), with a great potential of 
substitution of the conventional  agrichemicals. They have particular characteristics regarding the absence of involvement of 
chemical and/or synthetic products in its fabrication and consequently those products are suitable for its use in the organic or 
biological farming. 
Due to their novelty and rapid growing, Biofertilisers and Biostimulants are lacking of a regulatory frame in most Member Sta tes 
and in the EU, although it is foreseen its regulation in the revision of Directive 2003/2003 CE on Fertilisers.  
There are diff erent associations at Member State, European or international level that integrate the companies participating in 
this emergent segment of the production of agricultural inputs: 
- AEFA - Asociación Española de Fabricantes de Agro-nutrientes http://aefa-agronutrientes.org/ 
- EBIC - European Biostimulants Industry Consortium http://www.biostimulants.eu/ 
- IBMA – International Biocontrol Manufacturers Association www.ibma-global.org/ 
Regarding its application field or method categories of biofertilisers could be stated as follows: 
Types by effect: 
• Nitrogen-fixing 
• Phosphate-solubilising 
• Potash-mobilizing 
• Others (zinc, boron, and sulfur-solubilising biofertilisers) 
By crops: 
• Cereals & grains 
• Pulses & oilseeds 
• Fruits & vegetables 
• Others (turf & ornamentals, plantation crops, fiber crops, spices, and silage & forage crops) 
By microorganisms components: 
• Rhizobium 
• Azotobacter 
• Azospirillum 
• Cyanobacteria 
• Phosphate solubilising bacteria 
• Others (potash-mobilizing, zinc biofertilisers, sulfur-solubilising biofertilisers, and manganese solubiliser) 
By application types: 
• Seed 
• Soil 
• Others (set treatment, foliar treatment, root dipping, and seedling root treatment) 
 
6. Market size, growth rate and market trend 
The increasing awareness regarding health and wellness, the growing organic food industry, and the significant increase in th e 
price of chemicals have played a huge role in providing the necessary boost to the global biofertilisers industry. Global 
Biofertilisers Market is expected to reach USD 1.88 Billion by 2020 at a CAGR of 14.0% from 2015 to 2020. The phosphate -
solubilising segment is the fastest- growing market in the biofertilisers industry across the globe. 
 
                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 122 
 
 
 
Figure 6.12. Biofertilisers global market size by types 
 
The market was dominated by North America in 2014 and accounted for the largest share in the total biofertilisers market. Asia-
Pacific is projected to be the fastest-growing market for between 2015 and 2020 due to the increasing prices of chemical fertilizers 
and increasing food demand due to population growth. In terms of type, the nitrogen fixing biofertilisers segment is projected to 
be the largest market for biofertilisers; whereas in terms of crop -type, cereals & grains is projected to be the largest market for 
biofertilisers in 2014. The cyanobacteria segment is projected to be the largest market for biofertilisers by 2020 in terms of 
microorganisms. Furthermore, by application, seed treatment is projected to be the largest market for biofertilisers in between 
2015 and 2020. 
The biofertilisers market is characterized by intense competition due to the presence of a large number of both large and small-
scale firms. Expansions, acquisitions, agreements and new product launches are the key strategies adopted by market players 
to ensure their growth in the market. 
 
7. Barriers and risks 
The main barriers and risks for the development of this value proposition are the following: 
- The risk for competition and price/efficiency barrier with other products already present in the market, with whom newly 
designed and produced biofertilisers have to be compared in tests and field trials.   
- The foreseen revision of Directive 2003/2003 CE o n Fertilisers, that will regulate Biofertilisers and Biostimulants, not 
regulated yet. 
- The future costs of product development and registration at EU and international level. 
- The challenge of producing relatively high amounts of microalgae at a low cost, f or liquid aminoacids biofertiliser 
production. 
- The risk of effectively and safely perform the field trials in order to obtain a reliable evaluation of the newly designed and 
produced biofertilisers, and the need of repetitive consistent good results at these evaluation tests. 
 
8. Business approach 
The solid and liquid biofertilisers valorisation line at URBIOFIN is a sideline of the main “demo” Plant for OFMSW conversion in 
bioethanol and the use of bioethanol as building block for other added value chemicals (bioplastics, bioethylene, etc). 
Using as raw materials the potential enormous amounts of stabilised liquid and solid biowaste coming from the fermentation / AD 
processes, is open a new window for the valorisation of these residuals and sidestreams of biowaste management via the 
Biorefinery concept, in which the connection between waste management companies (URBASER, BPE),  technology suppliers 
(IMECAL, CIEMAT), biotechnology companies (NOVOZYMES), RTOs (CIEMAT, AINIA, WR) and industries and SMEs 
companies, should be adjusted and still work beyond the project duration. 
The selected and separated origin of the biowaste and th e complex and careful selection and stabilisation process should 
guarantee the absence of impurities and pollutants, that would open the possibility of registration of the final products by End-of-
Waste label (out of the waste management scope regulations). 
Stable alliances between involved partners with the inclusion of specific inoculants or production technology suppliers and RTOs 
could lead to develop a long term successful business strategy for the production and commercialisation of biofertilisers. 

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 123 
 
 
7. ADDENDUM 2. ADVISORY LETTERS 
 
ADVISORY LETTER 1: ASSOCIATION OF CITIES AND REGIONS FOR RECYCLING AND SUSTAINABLE RESOURCE 
MANAGEMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 124 
 
 
ADVISORY LETTER 2: EUROPEAN ENVIRONMENTAL BUREAU 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 125 
 
 
ADVISORY LETTER 3: SPANISH TECHNOLOGY PLATFORM OF SUSTAINABLE CHEMISTRY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

                                                                             BBI 2016-D6                                                
745785 URBIOFIN - Part B - 126 
 
 
ADVISORY LETTER 4: SPANISH AGRO-FOOD COOPERATIVES