1. 1 million addition al used spare parts accessible for remanufacturing in Europe (Calculated for 
Automotive Remanufacturing Industry). 
2. Net material saving: 6000 tons (avg. used part weight 6KG) 
3. Net CO2 saving: 4500 tons CO2-eqv (avg. CO2 saving 4.5 kg/part) 
4. € 20 million worth of value available to the value chain actors to exploit 
5. Create portals for at least 2 different user -goups (e.g. “remanufacturers”, “wholesalers”, Buying -
groups”, …) 
6. Validate functionalities and relevance by user-testing with users of at least 2 different business-domains 
per user-group (e.g. for user -group “remanufacturers”: Feedback from users from logistic -department, 
commercial-department, sustainablility-department,…) 
7. Apply AR-support in sorting-process in at least 1 of C-ECO’s location and collect user-feedback 
8. Reduce sorting-errors by 20% 
Stream 3: Integration and creation of standards 
The parts of the circular value chain corresponding to value use and recovery many challenges such as complex 
product design, lack of used parts availability and information, unfavourable consumer perception, absence of 
appropriate reverse logistic networks, and lack of standard definition. The lack of standards is considered the 
most crucial barrier19 impacting, above all, remanufacturing. 
Specifically, remanufacturing differs from other recycling procedures because it returns product quality to the 
OEM’s performance. It builds a sustainable supply chain, beginning to end, because it requires fewer resources (40% 
energy, 30% material and 50% cost)20 than new products and is environmentally friendly by design. 
DiCiM proposes integrated digital solutions to support the implementation of the Circular Manufacturing Systems. 
However, there is a need for standards that ensure the remanufactured parts become accurate in design and quality, 
is consistent every time it is bu ilt, confidently inspected, and tested, and is easily maintained and retrieved due to 
their stored information history. Standards are also essential for the software solutions to ensure data 
interoperability across the value chain. Part of the efforts for DiCiM project will involve integration with current 
standards where they are available, identification of the gap in standards and creation of new ones, when necessary, 
as summarised in the following table: 
Table 7: Current standards21 and project contribution 
Challenge Standards DiCiM project contribution 
Product design 
Design standards BS 8887 and BS 7000. 
BS8887: Design for manufacture, assembly, 
disassembly, and end-of-life processing 
(MADE) Part 3: Guide to choosing an 
appropriate end-of-life design strategy. ISO 
AR to support repair, remanufacture, sorting 
etc.  
Design for circularity (to imagine not only 
how a product will be built, but how it will 
be rebuilt). With remanufacturing in mind, 
 
19 Yang, S.; Raghavendra, M.R.A.; Kaminski, J.; Pepin, H. Opportunities for industry 4.0 to support remanufacturing. Appl. Sci. 2018, 8. 
20 Chinese Characteristic Remanufacturing Industry and Its Innovation Development. Electric Welding Machine. Available online: 
https://en.cnki.com.cn/Article_en/CJFDTotal-DHJI201205003.htm. Accessed: 22 Feb. 2022 
21 Pratapa, P.; Subramoniam, R.; Gaur, J. Role of Standards as an Enabler in a Digital Remanufacturing Industry. Sustainability 2022, 14, 1643. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/su14031643  
EU Grants: HE CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-07 – 30.03.2022 
 
 
                                                       101091536- DiCiM- Part B - Page 16 of 45 
9001:2008 or ISO 13485:2003 can evaluate 
the quality of recycled parts. 
designers may change the materials and 
coatings they chose, as well as the 
accessibility and layout of parts. 
Used parts 
availability 
RIC ANSI standard (RIC001.1-201622) 
identifies and inspects the device for 
reusability, which also includes disassembly 
and inspection of the parts to ensure 
conformance to OEM standards. 
We include IoT and DLT to support product 
tracking that contributes to the availability of 
used parts. 
Used parts 
quality 
management 
Newly published ISO 20245:2017, cross-
border trade of second-hand goods, as a 
point of reference for governments to 
establish minimum screening criteria for the 
trade of second-hand goods across borders. 
Product tracking using IoT will provide 
insights into the conditions a product was 
exposed to including accidents, for example, 
before used parts acceptance. 
Negative 
perception of 
remanufacturing 
ISO 14020 details environmental labelling 
best practices: performance verification 
through third-party certifications and 
environmental labels will significantly 
improve the credibility of remanufacturers 
and convince the consumer of the recycled 
product quality.  
DiCiM provides information to customers to 
improve satisfaction and create product 
trust in the consumer, considering 
differences in consumer behaviour to make 
more effective dissemination and 
communication campaigns. More info in 
section 1.2.5 
Lack of 
internationally 
accepted 
definitions and 
protocols 
RIC001.1-201622 addresses concerns 
related to a lack of a broad understanding of 
the remanufacturing industry and addresses 
each sub-process from used parts 
acquisition to product labelling. ISO 20245 
establishes minimum screening criteria for 
cross-border trade of second-hand goods. 
Heavily affects the import of used spare 
parts into the different countries. 
Product tracking using IoT will provide 
insights into the conditions of the product, 
cross-country operations and more to help 
identify and improve confidence during the 
international exchange of goods. 
Reverse logistics 
network 
ISO/TC 323 committee has triggered 
frameworks for circular economy models. 
DiCiM provides a solution for OEMs, 
SMREs, and dealers to have their circular 
value chain managed as a service without 
losing control or being burdened with the 
effort and complexity of maintaining their 
own reverse logistics structure. 
Data integration 
with other 
departments 
The ISO 15926 is a standard for data 
integration, sharing, exchange, and hand-
over between computer systems. Wide 
availability of data models and reference 
data libraries to create models. 
The needs of different actors of the supply 
chain to be integrated into the mainstream 
planning using integrated ERP systems and 
processes. 
Data 
infrastructure  
Manufacturing Data Space initiative to 
support data sharing among manufacturing 
companies and with (service) providers, 
which serves as a model to show how 
sharing industrial data improves company 
operations, enhances business 
opportunities, and supports the transition 
towards a circular economy.  
The open access platform will be developed 
as per the reference architecture model for 
data sovereignty, decentral data 
management, data economy and data 
governance. This will ensure that the circular 
economy data can be shared with 
organisations beyond the DiCiM project.   
Skill training, 
talent, and 
technology 
ISO 9001 specifies requirements for a 
quality management system within an 
organization that can deliver products that 
consistently meet customer and regulatory 
requirements and improve customer 
satisfaction. 
DiCiM includes AR capabilities for value 
recovery and sorting processes  
 
22 RIC001.1-2016; Reman Standard. Remanufacturing Industries Council: West Henrietta, NY, USA, 2016. Available online: https://remanstandard.us/. Access 
on 22 February 2022 
EU Grants: HE CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-07 – 30.03.2022 
 
 
                                                       101091536- DiCiM- Part B - Page 17 of 45 
 
1.2.2. Use case 
All the challenges of the demonstrators described in Table 3-Table 6 have in common the need to access 
transparent lifecycle information and to share that information along the value chain. This also includes integration 
with other IT systems of the value chain actors to ensure data interoperability necessary for high quality value 
recovery. This common challenge (within the demonstrators and beyond) is addressed by the open access digital 
platform that DiCiM will develop. We highlight some key use case examples of the open access digital platform: 
Table 8: Use case examples for DiCiM open access digital platform  
 Digital infrastructure needs DiCiM Development 
Gorenje, Lexmark, Arcelik 
OEMs must coordinate with hundreds of SMEs to 
receive information about the parts they supply 
(material compositions, sources, etc.) to enhance 
value recovery activities. Most of them do not have 
structured data repositories and supply unstructured 
data by telephon e or e -mail, which OEMs needs to 
manually process, analyse, and archive. There is a high 
risk of incomplete or lost information.  
OEMs send a secure DiCiM data request via a URL, 
which contains a structured template for the data 
collection required from its suppliers.  
Suppliers must enter all data in mandatory fields 
until they can share the (now structured) data with 
OEMs. The data gets immediately integrated into 
OEMs’ internal repositories for easy storage and 
retrieval.  
OEMs want to store all documents and instructions 
related to value recovery activities in a secure 
platform that is connected (for data exchange) to the 
ERP systems but independent to avoid external parties 
accessing OEMs’ internal platform.  
OEMs store relevant information about the value 
recovery activities in the DiCiM platform. 
Lexmark 
Different divisions of Lexmark have done Life Cycle 
Assessment (LCA) of products and their value chains. 
But the information is scattered and often difficult as 
well as time-consuming to access.  
Lexmark makes LCA results available on the 
DiCiM platform and new LCA results are uploaded 
on DiCiM platform. 
Lexmark does not have access to the lifecycle 
information of the products that are sold through 
distributors. Although Lexmark’s distributors collect 
and store this information on their local server, it 
cannot be shared due to interoperability issues 
between distributors’ and Lexmarks’ IT systems.  
DiCiM creates a gateway for the distributors to 
share the information instantly.  
Gorenje, 
Lexmar
k To optimise the supply chain the OEMs want to keep 
a track of products (based on conditions and AI) that 
need to be brought back over time 
DiCiM platform collects this information from the 
IoT platform and makes this amiable for the OMEs 
to coordinate and optimise return logistics. 
Gorenje, Lexmark, 
Arcelik 
To optimise the spare parts inventory OEMs want to 
keep a track of spare parts sourced from the returned 
products 
DiCiM platform collects this information from the 
shop floor after components are recovered and 
based on this information the OEMs can create a 
long-term spare parts planning. 
To match the supply and demand of the refurbished 
and remanufactured products OEMs needs to keep a 
track of the inventory of the refurbished and 
remanufactured products.  
DiCiM platform collects this information from the 
shop floor after products are refurbished and 
remanufactured and based on this information the 
OEMs can create a long-term spare parts planning. 
Repair Shop 
An independent repair shop has received a washing 
machine produced by Gorenje and a fridge produced 
by Arcelik . To efficiently repair these products the 
mechanic needs repair manuals.  
The repair shop opens an account in the DiCiM 
platform and requests to get access to Gorenje and 
Arcelik’s information about the value recovery 
activities. Each company review the request and 
prepare a digital contract for the Repair Shop. 
After signing th e contract, the Repair Shop 
receives access to the desired information. 
EU Grants: HE CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-07 – 30.03.2022 
 
 
                                                       101091536- DiCiM- Part B - Page 18 of 45 
Core brokers 
C-ECO offers the service to manage used parts return 
for producers/remanufacturers from the market 
basing on financial incentives. To give them control on 
the reverse value chain, but do not burden them with 
the full complexity C-ECO needs t a comprehensive 
point-of-information to provide supply -chain-, 
commercial- and product -oriented information and 
from where missing core-supply can be identified and 
propagated to the market.  
C-ECO uses the planning information originating 
from its data out of the incentive system in DiCiM 
platform to identify core-demand and create core 
return options to cover this demand. This is done 
by using the Signifikants PIM-data via the DiCiM 
platform. The core return -options are then 
interlinked into Signifikants spare -parts-platform 
and transferred to its users in the event of relevant 
core-returns. Now the ‘options’ are available to a 
wider network of potential core suppliers and 
reman-producers can control the brokers. 
An individual core supplier in Signifikants spare 
parts platform get s directly connected to this 
demand in DiCiM platform where the ‘options’ are 
available during his ordering process.  
DiCiM platform 
owner Signifikant sees that there is a shift in the business 
model of the software industry. Selling a license and 
later on selling maintenance and integration services is 
becoming history for the software industry.  
To capture the current trend Signifikant makes the 
DiCiM platform an open -access platform that is 
free for users to open an account as well as assess 
publicly available information. The users can also 
store relevant information for free. 
Signifikant charges the user of the platform a fee 
only when information is exchanged with other 
users on the DiCiM platform.  
Platform affordable to SMEs business model.  
Consumer There is legislation in the discussion which insists that 
a consumer who wants to repair a product he/she 
should have the opportunity to do so. The OMEs need 
to make repair manuals and video instructions etc. 
available for the consumers. 
The consumers open an account on DiCiM 
platform to access the publicly available 
information about the repair of appliances. 
1.2.3. National and international research & innovation activities linked to the project 
We have identified the most relevant projects with synergies to the DiCiM project and described how their results 
could feed into our project: 
Table 9: National and international research & innovation activities linked to the project  
Project Partner Project description and cross-fertilisation opportunities 
ReCiPSS 
[H2020] 
2018 - 2022 
MU 
KTH 
C-ECO 
SIG 
GOR 
HGE 
In ReCiPSS, it was explored success factors for circular manufacturing systems in two 
cases where OEMs have different levels of control over their value chains: one case with 
full control, and one case with partial control. The project gathers 13 partners from 8 
countries. It involves the study of multiple circular business models, it's virtual modelling, 
simulation, and demonstration with two industry-driven large-scale key industries: white 
goods and automotive spare parts.  
DigiPrime 
[H2020] 
2020 - 2023 
C-ECO DigiPrime has the mission to develop a new concept of Circular Economy digital platform 
overcoming current information asymmetry among value-chain stakeholders, in order to 
unlock new circular business models based on the data-enhanced recovery and re-use of 
functions and materials from high value -added post-use products with a cross -sectorial 
approach. In that context, C -ECO has developed a service for logistic optimization and 
reverse-network configuration together with some partners out of the consortium. This 
includes a mobile app which shall be used in the demonstration -phase by automotive 
workshops to check in used parts combined with information on the last usage 
environment of the part (the vehicle). Data is shared with remanufacturers via the 
platform and use the data for logistic pick-up-planning and network-optimization. 
C-ECO is the WP leader for the demonstration WP. The project involves 20 use cases 
covering different European industrial sectors (automotive, renewable energy, electronics, 
textile, construction). 
CircThread 
[H2020] 
2021-2025 
GOR 
HGE 
The CircThread project's main objective is to unlock access to data now in silo’s and 
enhancing it as decision information for actors across and outside the extended product 
life cycle. The core is to create data linkages between product chain, value chain , asset 
EU Grants: HE CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-07 – 30.03.2022 
 
 
                                                       101091536- DiCiM- Part B - Page 19 of 45 
chain and life cycle chains based on a Product information Catalogue and enable 
information exchanges via data contracts governed by secure and reliable management 
standards. All the developments create synergies with DiCiM project. 
SerBiT 
[Eureka] 
2016-2019 
 
 
KTH, 
GOR, 
SIG 
Project to develop and verify an IT -platform to support the manufacturing industry in 
implementing Service -Based Business Models (SBBM) in the context of Circular 
Manufacturing Systems (CMS). The goal of the project has been achieved through three 
unique developments, an IT platform, a prototype of a smart washing machine and an IoT 
platform. All these developments work simultaneously in collecting, processing, and 
sharing data in real-time and thereby, enable the implementation of SBBM. 
ResCOM 
[FP7] 
2013-2017 
KTH, 
GOR 
Innovative methodology and software platform for the industrial implementation of 
closed-loop manufacturing systems. The generic requirements of the platform proposed 
for implementation of closed -loop manufacturing and the data model used for the 
management of the lifecycle of multiple products platform will be adapted in the DiCiM 
project 
5G-TIMBER 
[HORIZON 
EUROPE] 
CHX 5G-TIMBER aims to conduct advanced field trials of the most representative and 
innovative data-driven material, production, and installation flow by examples of small -
volume manufacturing, across 4 industries under the umbrella of the wood industry. 
Crowdhelix will create a new helix during the 5G-TIMBER project with links and synergies 
with the DiCiM Digital helix.  
EIBA 
(Funding 
reference 
033R226)  
C-ECO C-ECO is the co -ordinator of  this project which has received funding from German 
federal ministry of education and research. Its goal is to use digital sensor-data, machine-
vision, and artificial intelligence to identify used automotive parts for remanufacturing. The 
system will be demonstrated in C-ECO’s network of inspection centres. 
C-SERVEES  
[H2020] 
2018 - 2022 
ARCE & 
LEX 
Lexmark is part of the project consortium, contributes to the project by setting demo 
related to a circular economy business model, agreed within the C-Servees project. The 
project aims to boost the circular economy, boosting remanufactured and refurbished 
products in the electrical and electronic sector. Various activities ha ve been carried out 
to examine new possibilities (e.g.: dismantling demo, refurbished printer testing with 
customers, customer surveys, recycled material testing) 
1.2.4. Interdisciplinarity and integration of social science and humanities  
To create effective change that spurs a sustainable and responsive production environment and supply chains, we 
built a consortium with knowledge from different disciplines. They combine expertise from different aspects of the 
value-chain, including: 
Table 10: Capabilities of the partners 
Partner 
Domain 
MU 
KTH 
TUC 
ULFS 
IDE 
IRIS 
SIG 
C-ECO 
GOR 
ARCE 
LEX 
CHX 
APRA 
ERC 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 
Data processing & analysis   X X X X  X X      
Machine learning    X X X X X       
Distributed Ledger Technology    X X  X        
Reverse Logistics X       X X X X    
Societal acceptance X        X  X X X X 
Circular economy and supply chain X X  X   X X X X X X X X 
Environmental assessment  X         X    
Industrial production  X X      X X X    
Re-manufacturing & recycling  X        X X    
Business processes X X   X X X X X   X X X 
1.2.5. Gender dimension  
Consumers, through their actions and purchasing habits, can have considerable i nfluence on how products are 
developed, delivered, used, and potentially reused. In this context, there are multiple studies that highlight a strong 
gender dimension regarding consumption patte rns and environmental concerns. For instance, when selecting 
electronic products, women prefer  those that have an end -of-life feature ( namely reuse, remanufacture, or 
EU Grants: HE CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-07 – 30.03.2022 
 
 
                                                       101091536- DiCiM- Part B - Page 20 of 45 
recycle)23. In general, women tend to follow a more sustainable approach in their attitudes, being more responsive 
to the ecological and environmental considerations of product purchased and consumed, including their reusability 
when there is a choice24,25,26. The OECD points out how “women can be key drivers of change, as consumers and 
as decision-makers, in both the public and private sectors. Integrating gender equality is essential for the successful 
implementation of a circular economy strategy”27  
An attractive digital tool that has the capacity to support the engineering of a Circular Economy must support and 
promote sustainable consumption practices that prioritise waste minimisation by extending product life. This can 
only be achieved with a clear understanding of consumer behaviour. Targeting gender roles and behavioural 
preferences in consumption as well as waste generation and prevention could be a key pillar in the transition to 
the circular economy not only by reducing waste but also by addressing some gender inequalities28.  
We regard it as crucial to address the differences in consumption patterns at the end-user level, as well as different 
attitudes, perceptions, environmental attitudes. The project brings importance through joint and specific 
dissemination actions. To engage all societal actors in the creation of good circular systems, through awareness -
raising on sustainable consumption and encouraging participation in leadership and managerial roles. Data and 
information collection tasks (such as co-creation workshops) will ensure that opinions and inputs of all genders are 
collected and given equal weights. Both WP 8 and 9 will ensure that the gender dimension is ensured in project 
management and exploitation and dissemination of results. 
1.2.6. Open Science practices  
The Open Science approach, following findable, accessible, interoperable, and reusable (FAIR) principles, has been 
considered as the main pillar when planning the measures to maximise the reach of communication and 
dissemination activities for DiCiM project. In the context of this project, scientific information refers to article pre-
prints, peer-reviewed articles in scholarly journals, articles in conference proceedings, monographs, patents, and 
research data (data underlying publications, curated data and/or raw data). 
CHX, the dissemination leader, will establish the dissemination strategy from the start (dissemination plan available 
by M6) of the project. It will include early and open sharing of research (through pre -registration, pre-prints and 
registered reports), research output management including data management (as described in the section below) 
and measures to ensure reproducibility or research outputs. 
Pre-print versions of all articles will be deposited into multidisciplinary open access repositories , (mainly Zenodo, 
more information in Table 11). Once published in a scholarly journal or a conference proceeding, the article's final 
version will be immediately posted into the Institutional open repository. This repository will automatically feed 
OpenAIRE with articles to ensure the largest possible  impact among researchers, policymakers and businesses . 
DiCiM consortium members will publish peer-reviewed scientific articles in gold open access journals listed by the 
Directory of Open Access Journals (DOAJ). Key partners have reserved a budget for article processing charges of 
gold open access publications. 
Each partner will ensure open access to the deposited publication (via the repository) within six months of 
publication, assuming an electronic version is available without extra charge via the publisher. The partners will also 
ensure access to the bibliographic metadata that identify the deposited publication (including terms under the grant 
agreement, the name of the action, acronym and grant number; the publication date, and length of embargo period 
if applicable, and a persistent identifier). All scient ific peer -reviewed articles will be published under Creative 
Commons CC BY 4.0 license. Thus, the authors retain all the copyright of the article. However, the partners will 
retain their copyright and grant adequate licences to publishers based on Creative Commons licenses. 
1.2.7. Data management and management of other research outputs  
Data management are part of WP9, which will start with the formal release of a Data Management Pan ( D9.3) at 
 
23 Atlason, R., D. Giacalone and K. Parajuly (2017), “Product design in the circular economy: Users’ perception of end-of-life scenarios for electrical and 
electronic appliances”, Journal of Cleaner Production, Vol. 168, pp. 1059-1069, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.09.082. 
24 Kaenzig, J., S. Heinzle and R. Wüstenhagen (2013), Whatever the customer wants, the customer gets? Exploring the gap between consumer preferences and 
default electricity products in Germany, Energy Policy, Vol. 53, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2012.10.061. 
25 Khan, N. and P. Trivedi (2015), Gender Differences and Sustainable Consumption Behavior, http://www.eajoutrnals.org. 
26 Bulut, Z., F. Kökalan Çımrin and O. Doğan (2017), Gender, generation and sustainable consumption: Exploring the behaviour of consumers from Izmir, 
Turkey, International Journal of Consumer Studies, Vol. 41/6, pp. 597-604, http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/ijcs.12371. 
27 OECD (2021), Gender and the Environment: Building Evidence and Policies to Achieve the SDGs, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/3d32ca39-en. 
28 OECD (2020), Session 5, Gender-specific consumption patterns, behavioral insights, and circular economy, 2020 Global Forum on Environment, Paris, 5-6 March, 
http://www.oecd.org/env/GFE-Gender-Issues-Note-Session-5.pdf.  
EU Grants: HE CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-07 – 30.03.2022 
 
 
                                                       101091536- DiCiM- Part B - Page 21 of 45 
M6. The project will follow the open data management guidelines of the Horizon Europe Programme, namely: 
• The project will deposit the research data in a research data repository that facilitates linking publications and 
underlying data through persistent identifiers and data citations, such as EPOS data and service repository, of which 
the CSC IDA repository is an integral part. 
• The project will enable third parties to access, mine, exploit, reproduce and disseminate (free of charge for any 
user) these research data by attaching Creative Commons Licences to the data deposited. 
• The project will provide information via the research repository about the tools available to the users that are 
needed to validate the results (e.g., specialised software or software code, algorithms, and analysis protocols). 
Wherever possible, the project will also provide these instruments. 
To maximise dissemination  impact, we will include a policy to make  all project deliverables labelled as “public” 
(Chyba! Nenalezen zdroj odkazů.) and related datasets freely available on the project website. A publishable v
ersion of the document will be produced and shared on the project website in all other cases. 
Table 11: Data management methodology and tools 
DATA SUMMARY 
Data purpose: Our project will collect and generate product and socio-economic data related to the Circular 
Economy within the target of interest in the automotive, electronics and whitegoods sectors. Relevant data 
will be placed in open repositories after a period of grace for the consortium members to properly curate and 
assess whether some results are sensitive in nature, given the strategic importance of  the production 
environments and supply chains. 
Data origin: The project data may originate from open databases; 3rd party suppliers or industrial pilots. We 
will ensure that we sign formal open data sharing agreements with all parties for those datasets we would like 
to place in open repositories. 
Data utility: We expect that our open datasets will be useful to 1) researchers (to progress the state -of-the-
art further), 2) industrial partners (to improve the data exchange among value chain actors ), and 3) public 
authorities (to support them in defining their role as promoters, facilitators and enablers). 
FINDABILITY 
Discoverability: Open datasets will be made findable with persistent links and a clear metadata schema 
Persistent identifiers: We will use the ORCID reference (Open Researcher and Contributor ID) for 
researchers in our team. ORCIDs are valuable because they connect all researcher’s outputs regardless of the 
author’s name or affiliation changes. For digital research materials, we will use the Direct Object Identifier 
(DOI). It can be assigned to articles, datasets, or any other shared project output.  
Naming conventions: For public project documents, the parent file will be the title of the work package, and 
each work package file will contain a minutes file as well as files for each task within the work package. The 
minute's file will contain the meeting minutes for the work package, while the task files will contain documents 
pertaining to that task’s activities and may potentially contain an additional minute file containing meeting 
minutes specific to that task. 
ACCESSIBILITY 
Data repository: Zenodo29 repository has been chosen as the main platform to upload all public data sets 
and scientific publications. Additionally, we will consider other platforms, such as the European Open Science 
Cloud (EOSC), the European Data Infrastructure (EDI) and the Open Research Europe publishing platform. 
Open data and access methods: Zenodo enables FAIR practices by creating a persistent digital object identifier 
(DOI) for each item, making them easily citable, it complies with DataCite's Metadata Schema, which is one of 
the broadest cross-domain standards available and, as the servers are hosted at CERN, the data and metadata 
will be retained and maintained by and for the lifetime of the laboratory. 
INTEROPERABILI
TY 
Metadata vocabularies, standards and methodologies  according to the purpose: (i) Descriptive metadata to 
help users discover and identify a resource (e.g., Title, Abstract, Author, and Keywords).  (ii)Administrative 
metadata to manage an information resource (e.g., provenance, processing, and rights information).  (iii) 
Structural metadata describe the relationship between parts of an information resource, especially digital 
resources, which often consist of multiple files.  (iv) Technical metadata to document technical attributes of 
digital objects or resources.  (v) Preservation metadata to support and document the long -term digital 
preservation of an information resource or digital object. 
RE-USE Documentation: All our documentation will include basic information about the data that allow for its correct 
interpretation and reuse by ourselves in the future and by other researchers (e.g., README file, README tab, 
Data Dictionary, Codebook, Commented Code, Lab Notebooks, as applicable). 
Licenses: Each dataset used in the project will be accompanied by a data license that details the permissions 
associated with the use of that dataset. The licenses for each dataset will be stored in their respective 
 
29 General-purpose open-access repository developed under the European OpenAIRE program and operated by CERN. Accessible at https://zenodo.org/  
EU Grants: HE CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-07 – 30.03.2022 
 
 
                                                       101091536- DiCiM- Part B - Page 22 of 45 
repository, where they will be found in the respective dataset’s README and metadata file. 
SECURITY Data can be made available within the project team and shared with partners and stakeholders via Zenodo. 
The data is stored in Zenodo's entire technical infrastructure is located on CERN's premises which is subject 
to CERN's legal status, which includes immunity from the jurisdiction of the national courts to ensure their 
independence from the individual Member States. The servers are managed according to the CERN Security 
Baseline for Servers, meaning e.g. remote access to our servers are restricted to Zenodo staff with appropriate 
training, and the operating system and installed applications are kept updated with the latest security patches. 
ETHICS 
GDPR compliance: The project (and its data management tools) will be fully compliant with the General Data 
Protection Regulation (GDPR) regulations laid out in Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament 
and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of natural persons regarding the processing of personal 
data and the free movement of such data and repealing Directive 95/46/EC (20) and respects regulations on 
intellectual property rights (IPR) (24). Database access will be entirely anonymous. If a user wishes to use our 
open repositories, they will be required to register an account. The user must provide their email address and 
a password and grant their consent that their email address is processed and used for account -related 
communications and management. In addition, data on the type of user (i.e., industry, research, etc.) will be 
logged to provide the Consortium with key statistics on data access by final users. The user is free to revoke 
their consent at any time, which would lead to the deletion of their account. 
2. Impact  
2.1. Project’s pathways towards impact 
2.1.1. The big picture. 
A circular business model is sustainable only if the value can be economically  and environmentally  
recovered from the product.  
In Europe, cross-sectoral activities to facilitate  knowledge transfer and promote the industry do  not exist in 
remanufacturing - unlike in the  recycling industry. Our major competitors, the USA  and China, already have  a 
common vision and strategy  for remanufacturing within their industrial landscapes30. European remanufacturing  
could lose competitiveness against these more organised economies. As a result, there is a real need for a European-
level solution to encourage remanufacturing throughout Europe. 
By keeping components and their embodied material in use for longer, large environmental benefits can be realised; 
for example, the remanufacturing of automotive components yields some 88% materials savings compared to using 
a new product, with an associated 53% decrease in CO2 emitted and 56% lower energy requirement.  
Further, securing reliable and undistorted access to certain ‘critical’ raw materials is a growing concern within the 
EU to reduce the high risk associated with their supply. Remanufacturing has the ability to keep advanced 
materials, including those termed as critical raw materials, within the economy. 
In addition to its economic and environmental benefits, remanufacturing provides opportunities for the creation of 
highly skilled jobs and economic growth. Despite these positives, remanufacturing is an undervalued part  of the 
industrial landscape and an under-recognised, sustainable industry. 
Remanufacturing faces many challenges such as complex product design, high cost of resources, lack of standard 
definition, unfavourable consumer perception, absence of appropriate reverse logistics network and financials, and 
lack of spare parts availability and information31. These challenges prevent this process from significantly impacting 
sustainability and are addressed with a series of standards and frameworks. These standards make reman feasible 
for organizations and even advance their green agendas under the UN. 
Digital technologies, including the IoT and ML, can help smooth the implementation of reman ufacture standards 
and allow for low-cost operations, price-sensitive markets, and cheap labour costs32. However, standards to resolve 
these challenges are neglected today in research and practice. The lack of remanufacturing standards is considered 
the most crucial barrier today33. 
 
30 Parker, D., Riley, K., Robinson, S., Symington, H., Tewson, J., Jansson, K., Ramkumar, S. and Peck, D., 2015. Remanufacturing Market Study. [online] 
Remanufacturing.eu. Available at: <https://www.remanufacturing.eu/assets/pdfs/remanufacturing-market-study.pdf> [Accessed 8 March 2022]. 
31 Chakraborty, K.; Mondal, S.; Mukherjee, K. Critical analysis of enablers and barriers in extension of useful life of automotive products through 
remanufacturing. J. Clean. Prod. 2019, 227, 1117–1135. 
32 Ghoreishi, M.; Happonen, A. Key enablers for deploying artificial intelligence for circular economy embracing sustainable product design: Three case 
studies. AIP Conf. Proc. 2020, 2233, 050008. 
33 Pratapa, P.; Subramoniam, R.; Gaur, J. Role of Standards as an Enabler in a Digital Remanufacturing Industry. Sustainability 2022, 14, 1643. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/su14031643  
EU Grants: HE CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-07 – 30.03.2022 
 
 
                                                       101091536- DiCiM- Part B - Page 23 of 45 
The skills and knowledge of operators involved in value recovery operations, can also be improved by using AR 
technology for a process traditionally considered as a non-value-added, such as disassembly or sorting operations. 
This is a cost and time -efficient optimisation to improve the efficiency of the disassembly and sorting processes 
performed by human operators and optimize the spare parts and core-retrieval process.  
There is a lack of universally accepted specifications and standards for data, products, and business processes, 
regarding the design, quality, manufacturing, and production of used products 30, which can lead to unauthorized 
collection and illegal use of scrap parts, hurting remanufacturing reputation and efforts. As a result, there are 
regulatory barriers preventing core parts to cross international borders due to a lack of clear distinction between 
remanufactured products and refurbished products, pre -owned products in existing government policies and 
regulations. The European Remanufacturing Network (ERN) further verifies that “An absence of an accepted legal 
definition was found to exacerbate this issue on a global scale"30, presenting a prominent hindrance in advancing the 
value recovery industry in many European countries. It is pivotal that standards are developed and propagated 
internationally to provide consistency and transparency in the economy and facilitate the free movement of used 
spare parts (known as cores in the automotive sector) to allow remanufactured products to be more accessible. 
The solutions to be developed must contribute to proper identification of remanufactured products, encouraging 
public procurement of equipment remanufactured to specified quality standards, creating, and promoting universally 
developed and accepted standards on reman to raise public awareness. 
2.1.2. Addressing expected outcomes with specific project impacts. 
DiCiM projects understands these challenges and addresses de expected outcomes (call topic) and support the 
overall EC ambition (call destination) of industrial leadership and increased autonomy in key strategic value chains. 
Table 12: Expected outcomes and project impacts 
Expected Outcome Pathway Towards Impact Impact KPI by 2030 
Call topic: Provide a range of 
support solutions and innovative 
digital tools for engineers, 
technicians, and operators on the 
factory floor, in order to  build agile, 
sustainable and responsive 
production environment and supply 
chains, with specific focus on areas 
such as material saving, repair, 
refurbishing, re -manufacturing, 
recycling, and reuse of products and 
components 
The project includes: (1) support during 
the value use phase with IoT and ML to 
monitor the performance of core products 
and create effective and optimized reverse 
logistics schedules. (2) Support during the 
value recovery phase with ML and AR for 
initial inspection and decision assistance 
for engineers, technicians, and operators 
on the factory floor.  
Although the present project focuses on 
value reuse and value recovery, all areas of 
the CVM are impacted. 
As explained in Table 3 to 
Table 6 by applying the 
integrated digital solutions the 
demonstrators can improve 
spare parts recovery efficiency 
and rate as well as logistics 
efficiency by 30% -90%, 20% -
150% and 30%-50% respectively. 
Call topic: Reduction of the 
dependency from imported raw 
materials or harmful materials for 
the European manufacturing sector 
(e.g. by material consumption 
reduction, material substitution and 
use of secondary raw materials); 
The remanufactur ing industry helps 
contain and circulate critical raw materials. 
The project contributes (1) with standard 
creation to facilitate the free movement of 
used spare parts and allow remanufactured 
products to be more accessible 
throughout the European Union. (2) With 
IoT to monitor the quality and quantity of 
core components as well as the 
accessibility of support solutions to carry 
out the activities. 
EU´s domestic supply for critical 
raw materials will be enhanced 
sustainably. The four 
demonstrators combined have 
the potential of net material 
saving more than 16000 tons pf 
materials per year. 
Call topic: Define specifications and 
standards for data, products, and/or 
business processes, that can be 
agreed and commonly used by many 
industrial actors and across different 
industry sectors; and facilitate 
industry agreements on circularity 
and sustainability through increased 
data exchange among value chain 
actors and enable the development 
of new types of businesses; 
We envision standards covering all areas: 
(1) Product design, (2) Core availability, (3) 
Core quality management, (4) Negative 
perception of remanufacturing, (5) Lack of 
internationally accepted definitions and 
protocols, (6) Reverse logistics network, 
(7) Data integration with other 
departments, and (8) Skill training, talent, 
and technology 
The project implements the 
existing standards (Table 7) and 
will contribute to creating new 
standards with at least the 4 
demonstrators studied in the 
project.  
Social acceptance is gained 
through the awareness 
programmes reaching 5,000,000 
citizens. 
EU Grants: HE CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-07 – 30.03.2022 
 
 
                                                       101091536- DiCiM- Part B - Page 24 of 45 
Call topic: Reduce the skills and 
knowledge gap for the actors 
involved. 
Product information is fed into the 
proposed framework for disassembly 
planning and content generation. 
Disassembly planning encapsulates 
information related to the disassembly 
sequence, and it is enhanced by the visual 
cues and animations provided by the 
content generation module. This 
information is ultimately presented to the 
end-user in the AR interface.   
The project will develop the 
knowledge base in 3 
manufacturing sectors. The skill 
and knowledge gap among the 
operators that will be involved in 
the demonstrators and continue 
using the development will be 
reduced. Furthermore, the 
project will develop (WP 7) 
high-quality training materials 
for widespread application for 
enhancing the skill of the 
European labor force to 
improve their employability 
(Task  7.4) 
Call destination (wider impact): 
Global leadership in clean and 
climate-neutral industrial value 
chains, circular economy and 
climate-neutral digital systems and 
infrastructures (networks, data 
centers), through innovative 
production and manufacturing 
processes and their digitization, new 
business models, sustainable-by-
design advanced materials and 
technologies enabling the switch to 
decarbonization in all major emitting 
industrial sectors, including green 
digital technologies. 
A circular business model is sustainable 
only if value can be economically 
recovered from the product. 
Remanufacture requires fewer resources 
(40% energy, 30% material, and 50% cost) 
compared to the production of a new 
product 34. Further, remanufacturing keeps 
raw materials within the economy. It also 
provides opportunities to create high skill 
jobs and economic growth; and yet, 
despite all these benefits, remanufacturing 
remains an undervalued and under -
recognized part of the industrial landscape. 
The project aims to enha nce a circular 
economy through the digitization of the 
remanufacture activities, which are proven 
to reduce waste and avoid  significant 
energy use and emission to air and water35. 
Our objective is to create the 
gold standard for value recovery 
in the use cases considered. The 
solutions developed in the 
project can have high 
replicability potential in other 
industrial sectors. Thus, placing 
European software, at the 
centre of the glo bal circular 
economy value chain.  
Savings due to value recovery 
actions of reducing 40% energy, 
30% material and 50% cost for 
the European manufacture.   
which is aligned to the estimated 
energy, material and cost 
reduction indicated in Table 3 to 
Table 6 for the demonstrators. 
2.1.3. Scale and significance of the project’s contribution to the expected outcomes and 
impacts. 
The impacts of the project can be much higher on a longer term, once project outcomes are transferred, replicated 
and exploited across the EU. DiCiM integrated digital solutions fall into the Global Industry 4.0 Market projected 
to grow from €59 bn in 2021  to €150 bn by 2026 at a CAGR of 20.6%, 36 driven by the rising adoption of digital 
technologies in the manufacturing process. 
Table 13: Business case  
Application Market User Needs Competitive Advantage 
Digitalised 
value 
management 
system with 
IoT, ML and 
DLT support 
The AI in manufacturing market 
is blooming - expected to grow 
from €1bn in 2020 to 15.2 bn by 
2026 at a CAGR of 57.2% over 
the period (Source: 
Marketsandmarkets) 
Companies need to make value 
recovery and reuse activities 
profitable. To achieve 
optimization of reverse logistics 
as well as efficiency and 
responsiveness in value recovery 
activities. 
Digitalised value 
management system 
connected to  product 
information management 
systems (including ERP and 
PIM) to support decision 
making  
Value Recovery 
with AR 
(general case) 
AR is revolutionizing the 
manufacturing industry, 
expected to hit €2.6 bn by 2023. 
Factories want to use AR 
solutions to become more 
customer-centric, efficient, and 
The first AR solution fully 
integrated with existing 
tools including a web-based 
 
34 Chinese Characteristic Remanufacturing Industry and Its Innovation Development. Electric Welding Machine. Available online: 
https://en.cnki.com.cn/Article_en/CJFDTotal-DHJI201205003.htm (accessed on 03 March 2022). 
35 Parker, D., Riley, K., Robinson, S., Symington, H., Tewson, J., Jansson, K., Ramkumar, S. and Peck, D., 2015. Remanufacturing Market Study. [online] 
Remanufacturing.eu. Available at: <https://www.remanufacturing.eu/assets/pdfs/remanufacturing-market-study.pdf> [Accessed 8 March 2022]. 
36  Industry 4.0 Market. Source: marketsandmarkets 
EU Grants: HE CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-07 – 30.03.2022 
 
 
                                                       101091536- DiCiM- Part B - Page 25 of 45 
A recent survey research reveals 
the use of AR in product and 
service development could 
deliver a US$360 billion GDP 
boost by 2030.  (Source: 
Analytics insight) 
responsive by troubleshooting 
remotely in real -time with 
experts, securing safety and 
quality and reducing expenses.  
application for disassembly 
and value recovery and a 
standalone AR solution for 
sorting parts   
Value recovery 
(Remanufacture) 
Remanufacture differs from 
other recycling procedures 
because it returns product 
quality to the original equipment 
manufacturer’s performance . 
the activity generates around 
€30bn in turnover and employs 
around 190,000 people 35. The 
four key regions, estimated to 
account for some 70 % of 
remanufacturing value in Europe, 
are Germany, the UK & Ireland, 
France and Italy35. 
Remanufacture faces many 
challenges such as complex 
product design, high cost of 
resources, lack of standard 
definition, unfavourable 
consumer perception, absence 
of appropriate reverse logistics 
network and financials, and lack 
of core availability and 
information37. These challenges 
prevent this process from 
significantly impacting 
sustainability and are addressed 
with a series of standards and 
frameworks. 
DiCiM is endorsed by 
important associations  of 
major associations with the 
capacity to influence 
different groups: from 
regulatory bodies to the 
general public. In additions 
to partner CHX, advisors 
ERC and APRA Europe 
APPLiA, in collaboration 
with DigitalEurope and 
DATEurope to generate a 
change in consumer 
perception and entice 
stakeholder collaboration. 
Conclusion: The 4 innovation streams of the project are combined to develop an industrial platform 
supporting value recovery with higher productivity  and lower costs. The platform architecture is 
modular to allow for different applications (i.e., combining a subset of these capabilities to produce a 
more cost-effective solution for a specific domain). This also will increase the impact of the project, as 
individual capabilities can be packaged as independent results and exploited separately. 
2.1.4. Identifying potential barriers and addressing them with project activities.  
Currently, the consortium has not identified any regulatory or compliance issues that could affect directly the 
project executions. However, as the value recovery of products is impacted by current regulations, standards, and 
the public acceptance, we have isolated three main barriers to the adoption of DiCiM: 
Table 14: Potential barriers to impact and how we plan to address them in the project. 
Barrier How can it limit the project impact? How will we address it? 
Technical 
obstacles 
DLT based solutions may not scale well on cases with 
large data sets or may require strong technical expertise 
to manage the data and its consistency.  
We have committed part of the efforts 
during the development of the project to 
evaluate the state-of-the-art of DLT and 
explore alternatives such as Gaia-X. 
Standards As explained in Table 7, there is multitude of standards 
affecting different parts of the value recovery chain. To 
create significant change, it may be necessary to 
contribute to several standards at the same time 
increasing the complexity and limiting the project’s 
impact 
Important stakeholders with the ability to 
impact standards are part of the project 
(namely CHX, STR and ERC). We have also 
dedicated resources to this end. We will 
start by influencing those more accessible 
and critical standards and continue beyond 
the project. 
Impact 
obstacles 
Stakeholders are unwilling to be part of an open access 
platform, as it may sound threatening to some due to 
misconceptions of what open access means 
In communication and dissemination, it will 
be made clear that open access does not 
mean open data.  
2.1.5.  Exploitation strategy. 
→ Scale up plan to market  
The results of DiCiM project continue to mature after the end of this project. To this aim, a scale up plan has been 
designed for each exploitable technology to reach the market (TRL7-TRL9). The Open access digital platform will 
be developed by SIG partner, with support from IDE, IRIS, and C-ECO in WP3, and integrated with developments 
in WP4 done by research partners for demonstration activities in WP5. Potential future exploitation by interested 
partners is presented in Table 16. We have dedicated resources in T8.5 to produce a detailed business plan with 
 
37 Pratapa, P.; Subramoniam, R.; Gaur, J. Role of Standards as an Enabler in a Digital Remanufacturing Industry. Sustainability 2022, 14, 1643. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/su14031643  
EU Grants: HE CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-07 – 30.03.2022 
 
 
                                                       101091536- DiCiM- Part B - Page 26 of 45 
future steps as the project nears TRL6. 
Table 15: Technology road to TRL9 and estimated time in years after the project. 
Technology Scale-up activities (TRL7-TRL9) Duration 
Open access 
digital platform  
- Create API for 3rd party stakeholders to integrate with the platform 
- Make the platform accessible for the end-users to facilitate product returns. 
- Integrate training materials in the platform 
- Final UX/UI design that is user friendly
1.5 Years 
Support 
solutions  
ML 
solutions 
- Scale-up of IoT infrastructure 
- Final training of the algorithms to refine the condition monitoring and image 
processing 2 Years 
AR App - Image processing and AR applicability to further industries. 
→ Exploitation plan  
The consortium has identified a preliminary list of exploitable results and defined preliminary exploitation strategies 
for them. During the project, the consortium members will develop a business plan supporting the market 
introduction and replication of the project results. 
Table 16: Exploitable result, interested partner and business model. 
Partner Exploitable result Value proposition and patenting areas Business model 
SIG Open access digital 
platform 
The platform is available as a stand-alone solution and also to 
integrate into the existing IT systems to manage product 
lifecycle information for value recovery activities 
Licencing/ 
subscription 
LEX ML algorithms for 
condition monitoring  
Condition monitoring capability is available for distributors and 
wholesalers to offer a better service to their customers  Sell as service 
IRIS ML algorithms for 
image processing  Image processing capability is available for other sectors  Product and service 
TUC, 
IDE AR applications DiCiM project will bring forward AR applications that can be 
commercialized in the automotive and white goods sectors Product and service 
C-ECO 
Software solution   Right used spare parts, in the right quality, at the right time and 
in the right location  Used spare parts 
Software solution A software module that can be integrated to other IT systems. Licencing and pay-
per-use 
GOR 
LEX 
ARCE 
Efficient product and 
part recovery 
mechanism   
Low-cost products and spare parts are available long after the 
guarantee period is over 
Offer recovered 
parts as spare parts 
Technology 
implemented  
Successful implementation of technology with an indication of 
clear improvement in value recovery activities.  
Knowledge sharing 
to scale up the 
technology 
internally 
IDE Appliances repairing 
data management   
The results achieved within the development of the Gorenje 
use case on repairing tracking and support will be integrated in 
the AiCORE solution which IDE is already developing for 
commercial exploitation. 
Software Licensing 
ULFS Condition monitoring 
solution 
Open-source solution for condition monitoring of white goods 
and printers, which is applicable by other actors   MIT licence (Free) 
KTH, 
MU, 
ULFS, 
TUC 
Contents and 
materials for 
education  
DiCiM project will bring forward beyond state-of-the-art 
knowledge and cases of technology implementation  Consultancy, 
training and 
education and 
research projects KTH 
Models and KPIs for 
performance 
evaluations 
DiCiM will define and develop KPIs as well as models 
(mathematical and simulation) for evaluating socio-economic 
and environmental performance evaluation 
 
2.2. Measures to maximise impact – Dissemination, exploitation, and communication. 
2.2.1. Impact pathway methodologies 
Table 17: Impact pathway methodology. 
Audience Specific needs Measures to maximise the impact 
EU Grants: HE CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-07 – 30.03.2022 
 
 
                                                       101091536- DiCiM- Part B - Page 27 of 45 
Researchers Promote the utilisation of standards for 
research scope in the academic sector to 
ensure that in the future, these standards will be 
implemented in the market. 
Educate and employ existing standards for manufacturing 
through 4 workshops and public awareness events in at 
least the 4 universities in the project. 
Industry 
players 
A d igital solution that supports new business 
models based on value recovery activities, such 
as remanufacturing or refurbishing existing 
products. 
200 members of Digital Helix by end of the project. 
Increased public awareness of value recovered products 
becomes positive. 
Industry 
workers 
Interaction with the tools is different depending 
on the worker's position. i.e., managers or 
operators.  Different actors will need to 
assimilate the tool for it to be effective 
Specific training, seminars, workshops and e-learning 
materials for  executives, middle managers, engineers, 
and operators to reach 2,000,000 blue- and white-collar 
workers. 
Regulators Legal issues and framework s that are 
relevant for the tec hnologies in the context 
of the European Union and national 
regulations where the demonstrators will be 
operated. 
 
Increased policy-maker awareness about the importance 
of CMS due to supply chain, sustainability, responsibility 
and economic risks linked to outside production. 
Public 
society 
Understanding novel technologies and learning 
about the positive impact of advanced materials 
3,000,000 citizens exposed to the e -learning module 
about value recovery actions (including courses, social 
media, podcasts, YouTube, press releases, publications, 
national science popularisation, etc.) 
All the described measures to maximise impact are covered  
2.2.2. Dissemination & communication activities 
For the dissemination and communication actions the project counts on the support of 3 important platforms: 
− Crowdhelix (CHX): Open Innovation platform that creates links between researchers and companies. Who 
contributes through the creation of a Virtual community and with a detailed clustering plan (details below) 
− Automotive Parts Remanufacturers Association, Europe (APRA): a global association that has been 
representing the interests of automotive remanufacturing companies since 1941 
− The European Reman Council (ERC): represents small and large businesses from all remanufactured product 
sectors. 
While CHX will be the main responsible for dissemination activities, APRA and ERC will be vital counselling partners 
to reach key stakeholders. 
→ DiCiM Virtual Community/Ecosystem “Digital” Helix: An Impact Accelerator  
DiCiM project will strongly contribute to the already existing vibrant, international, virtual community/ecosystem, 
named the Digital Helix. It will be an engine for impact, exploitation, clustering, and dissemination activities.   
DiCiM consortium will benefit from the CHX network that gathers 500+ member organisations from 51 
countries (all EU member states). It has the potential to reach 8,000+ research and innovation collaborators from 
its existing membership base. This network, supported by a customised technology platform, language processing 
and machine learning tools, has 40 virtual thematic areas/clusters (called “helixes”), that cover all the research 
and innovation fields. Through the helix, the consortium will create a network of at least 150 new organisations 
(M36), including: DiCiM partners, members from existing relevant Helixes (i.e., Manuf acturing, Materials, Raw 
Minerals, Circular Plastics helixes, etc. ), researchers (i.e., experts in digital/electronic systems, ci rcular economy, 
manufacturing, recycling etc. The UK “Digital Catapult” is already a member), industry actors (i.e., “IBM” is already 
a member, digital tools providers, key actors in the European manufacturing sector, etc. ), ethic and policy makers, 
civil society (end users), participants of other relevant projects to promote and develop clustering activities with 
sister projects from previous European projects and initiatives, (i.e. projects in Table 9), and relevant 
actors/associations across Europe/International (i.e., The European Factories of the Future Research Association 
(EFFRA), Processes4Planet, EIT Manufacturing, EIT Digital, Smart Specialisation Platform for Industrial 
Modernisation (S3P-Industry), etc.). We will integrate policymakers and public administrations to provide feedback 
on policy measures. To ensure sustainability, CHX will commit to maintaining the Helix for at least 2 years after 
the project has concluded. When the project ends, the Helix will continue to be hosted on Crowdhelix’s platform, 
EU Grants: HE CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-07 – 30.03.2022 
 
 
                                                       101091536- DiCiM- Part B - Page 28 of 45 
and everyone signed up during the project will be able to retain their accounts for free (as external organisations), 
as well as have the option for their organisations to join as full members on the network. The CHX Helix Manager 
will identify a member, from the Helix, that would be interested in strategically leading this Helix after the end of 
the project. The new helix will be supported by the CHX team. The activities performed in the Helix are shown in 
Figure 8 
 
 
Figure 8: DiCiM Digital Helix: Virtual Community/ecosystem 
→ DiCiM Clustering plan  
DiCiM cross-projects collaboration plan (aligned to task 8.6) is divided in 3 main sections, as shown in Figure 9:  
Collaboration board (S1): The projects with similar aims and synergies will be identified to create joint groups 
(1.6). To achieve this DiCiM will collaborate with relevant EU projects (included in Table 9), and relevant 
actors/associations across Europe/International ( i.e., Gaia-X, EFFRA, Processes4Planet, EIT Manufacturing, EIT 
Digital, S3P-Industry, etc.). All the projects and key stakeholders will be contacted (1.1) and the Collaboration Board 
(CB) will be consolidated (1.2). The CB will define the Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) (1.3) and the main ways 
of a fluent and frequent communication (1.4). A common identity (i.e logo) will be designed (1.5). 
Joint activities (S2): the CB members will promote and encourage collaborative activities (mainly with the sister 
projects), including regular meetings (2.1), joint participation and attendance to scientific conferences and business 
tradeshows (2.2), active participation in projects social media sites (2.3), development of joint scientific publications 
(2.4), and supporting the development of 
future legislation around digital tools (2.5). 
Future collaboration plan (S3) : a 
virtual workshop will be organised to 
promote the development of 
interdisciplinary consortiums, and to 
identify target calls aligned with their 
strengths. The Digital Helix will be an 
engine of collaborative activities.  
The consortium partners will publish 10 
publications by project end in scientific 
journals (e.g. Nature Communications) 
and present the results at media related 
congresses. We will interact with running 
projects DigiPrime (C-ECO as liaison) and 
CirThread (GOR and HGE as liaison). 
→ Individual dissemination plans  
Table 18: Individual dissemination plans. 
Partner Specific dissemination, exploitation and communication activities foreseen  
Figure 9: DiCiM Clustering plan 
EU Grants: HE CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-07 – 30.03.2022 
 
 
                                                       101091536- DiCiM- Part B - Page 29 of 45 
CHX 
-CHX will lead the dissemination and communication activities (development/management of the project 
logo, website, social media sites, press releases, newsletters, video, etc.) and WP8. 
-CHX, in collaboration with the consortium partners, will build the Digital helix, a virtual 
community/ecosystem on the Crowdhelix Platform, expecting to reach 150 new members (project 
partners, researchers, industry actors, policy makers, civil society, participants of other relevant projects, 
etc.) by M36.  
-CHX will organise 1 helix event. 
-CHX will promote clustering activities with relevant European projects and initiatives. 
MU 
 
- Write 4 peer-reviewed articles in high-quality international journals  
- Present the research findings 4 large international events and conferences in Europe and around the 
world (SME annual conferences in the US, Ellen MacArthur Foundation, world circular economy forum 
and annual conferences worldwide)  
- Conduct and publish at least 1 press release  
- Support peer-reviewed open-access articles written by academic and research partners  
- Produce 4 presentations in relevant scientific conferences  
- Prepare dissemination material, both digital (banners) and printed (flyers, posters)  
- Disseminate the research findings via the academic and industrial network of partners around the world 
(contact big 10 companies in Europe and countries around the world (the US and east Asia)  
- Contribute to the construction, preservation and updating of the webpage that will be built for the 
project.  
- Contribute to conducting and distributing weekly or monthly newsletters to subscribers on the official 
webpage of the project  
- Organise at least 8 industrial/ research workshops 
- Develop education materials reaching up to 250 students /year 
- Involve at least 2 PhD students  
- integrate industrial cases into the lifelong learning courses 
- Use social media channels (such as https://www.linkedin.com/company/76782551) and the web page of 
such as https://www.kth.se/en and https://www.iip.kth.se/ to disseminate the project, its activities and the 
research findings (create and promote success stories). MU, TUC and ULFS will use similar channels that 
they have access to.   
KTH 
TUC 
ULFS 
IDE - Support the peer-reviewed open-access articles written by academic and research partners. And write 
a peer-revied publications and white papers as confidentiality allows it. 
- Use corporate social media channels and company webpage to disseminate project results 
- Present the project results at local and international conferences 
- Present the project in their respective industry associations to foster the uptake of project results. 
-Present the results to customers and partners  
- Webinars 
IRIS 
SIG 
C-ECO 
GOR 
ARCE 
LEX 
Table 19: Joint communication, dissemination, and training activities  
Target Audiences Target objectives Tools & channels 
• Main customers: key actors in 
the European manufacturing 
sector. Engineers, technicians, 
and operators on the factory 
floor. 
• Other cross-cutting HEU 
projects, international and 
national projects.  
• EFFRA, Processes4Planet, 
industry multipliers, Sectorial 
Associations and EC 
initiatives such as the 
European Platform on Life 
Cycle Assessment .  
• Standardization bodies.  
• General Public and Mass 
Media.  
• Project awareness generation. 
• Dissemination of novel digital 
technologies and materials. 
• Collaboration with related projects 
such as Waste4Think, Arrowhead 
Tools, AI4DI, DENiM, in addition to 
those from Table 9  
• Create awareness of R&D activities 
for new materials and technologies. 
• Communication to policymakers to 
increase the influence of the project 
and its results and in future policies. 
• Communication to the general public 
about efforts being made towards the 
recognition of refurbished and 
remanufactured products. 
• Effective knowledge sharing among 
• Project corporate identity tools 
(logo, slogan) along with project 
website, posters, pitch decks, press 
releases.  
• Conferences, events, seminars and 
workshops: attending at least 2 
events and organising 4 
seminars/workshops.  
• 22 articles in Open access journals, 
mass media and magazines.  
• Social media: account on Twitter and 
LinkedIn mainly, we will also consider 
presence on other social media like 
Facebook and YouTube.  
• Visibility on third party websites 
(Research Gate, SlideShare, etc)  
• EU dissemination sources such as the 
EU Grants: HE CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-07 – 30.03.2022 
 
 
                                                       101091536- DiCiM- Part B - Page 30 of 45 
• Research and academic 
stakeholders.  
• Early-stage researchers.  
• PPPs, EIPs and EITs (i.e. EIT 
Manufacturing, EIT Digital, 
S3P-Industry).  
scientific communities. 
• Attract young talent to science. 
• Motivate early-stage researchers to 
remain in the EU and investigate. 
• Collaboration Increase private 
participation in R&D activities and 
attract valuable stockholders. 
EU Horizon Magazine, Innoradar or 
Innoboost.  
• Features in general newsletters and 
e-bulletins for society awareness of 
renewable energy storage 
technologies (appear in at least 4 
relevant bulletins)  
• Digital Helix community/ecosystem 
Table 20: Communication and dissemination KPIs.  
Track M12 M24 M36 M48 KPI (cumulative) 
Social Media 
Campaigns 
Twitter 
LinkedIn 
Facebook 
Twitter 
LinkedIn 
Facebook 
Twitter 
LinkedIn 
Facebook 
Twitter 
LinkedIn 
Facebook 
Twitter followers = 400 
LinkedIn group members = 200  
Facebook followers = 400 
Podcast    6 episodes Soundcloud reproductions = 1200  
Project Video Video1 - - - Total YouTube Views = 2,000 
Press releases Press release 
1  
Press release 
2  
Press release 
3 
Press release 
4 
Total PR coverage (incl. online 
articles) = 500 
Scientific 
Publications 
2 submissions 4 submissions 4 submissions 6 submissions Total publications = 16 
Articles 5 articles 10 articles 10 articles 10 articles Total articles = 35 
Industrial 
Workshops 
- 1 workshop 2 workshops 4 workshops Total attendees = 500  
Seminars  5 seminars  5 seminars Total attendees = 500  
Digital helix 50 members 50 members 50 members Free join Minimum members=150 
 
2.2.3. IPR strategy related to the result type. 
We are strongly committed to  a  sound IPR strategy that is advantageous for all parties and easy to understand. 
Dissemination and use of knowledge generated in the project are governed by the Grant Agreement and the 
Consortium Agreement terms. To make sure that these terms are followed, to avoid disputes and facilitate business 
planning, the Steering Committee will maintain an IPR register throughout the lifetime of the project. This document 
will list all items of knowledge relating to the work of the project (both background know -how a nd results 
developed in the project) and make explicit for each item its owner, nature, status and dissemination and protection 
measures. The directory will be regularly updated and distributed to all partners. It will form a key tool to enable 
knowledge management. An initial version of the IPR register will be created at the start of the project. However, 
at the stage of producing the proposal, the consortium has already considered what kind of strategy should be 
followed concerning IPR issues for the pro ject's main results and reached a preliminary agreement on this. The 
basic principle on which we are agreed is that research and development results must be available to a large audience 
to facilitate the broad adoption of project results while having opti ons in place for rewarding those that invested. 
“IPR” means that the contributing partner will own the IPR of the result it has contributed to. “Use rights” mean 
that any third party (licensee) is allowed to request a license to use the IPR generated by another partner (licensor) 
against a financial compensation to be agreed between the licensor and the licensee. 
Table 21: IPR status of exploitation results. 
Initial agreement on IP & use rights Partner Owner Protection 3rd party access 
Data models MU Open Access 
Data repository used for ML training LEX, GOR, SIG, ARCE, C-ECO IPR NO ACCESS 
DiCiM open access digital platforms SIG IPR Use rights 
Extend ReCiPSS  spare parts data 
management platform’ C-ECO IPR Use rights 
EU Grants: HE CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-07 – 30.03.2022 
 
 
                                                       101091536- DiCiM- Part B - Page 31 of 45 
ML algorithms IRIS, ULFS IPR Use rights 
AR solutions  TUC, IDE IPR Use rights 
Image processing solution IRIS IPR Use rights 
2.3. Summary 
Table 22: Summary of the impact section 
SPECIFIC NEEDS EXPECTED RESULTS D&E&C MEASURES 
▪ Value recovery is a critical step 
towards circularity that must be 
integrated with the value use 
phase with digital tools to extract 
its full power.  
▪ Need for common ground across 
the manufacturing sector through 
synergies and standards.  
▪ 4 large -scale demonstrators in 
relevant industry sectors, directly 
applicable to 67% of the European 
Industry.  
▪ Creation of a community of early 
adopters that welcomes and 
enhances project results.  
▪ Scientific articles & posters (D) 
▪ Technical conferences and 
workshops (D) 
▪ Dissemination to the broader 
public (D) 
▪ Events with related projects (C) 
▪ Public events (C) 
▪ IPR protection of exploitable 
results (E) 
▪ Reach out to industry players (E) 
TARGET GROUPS OUTCOMES IMPACTS 
▪ Researchers 
▪ Policy makers 
▪ Public society 
▪ Industrial players in the 
manufacturing sector. Targeting 
specifically OEMS in the 
automotive parts, electronic 
goods, and white goods industries 
first. 
▪ Increased awareness for industrial 
players of the gains of value 
recovery activities. 
▪ Better public understanding and 
acceptance of remanufactured 
and refurbished products.  
▪ Enhanced awareness about the 
importance of standards for 
academy stakeholders. 
▪ Increased awareness of standards 
for the academy (scientific) 
▪ Important gains for European 
industry as KPIs are included in 
Table 3 to Table 6 (economic) 
▪ Specific materials  for executives, 
middle managers, engineers, and 
operators and society to reach 
five million people (societal) 
3. Quality and efficiency of the implementation  
3.1. Work plan and resources  
 
Figure 10: Pert Chart 
DiCiM project will last 48 months and will be divided in 9 Work Packages (WPs). The Pert chart ( Figure 10) 
provides an overview of the DiCiM work plan structure.  
 
 
3.1.1. List of work packages 
See Annex 1 (part A) of the grant agreement  

EU Grants: HE CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-07 – 30.03.2022 
 
 
                                                       101091536- DiCiM- Part B - Page 32 of 45 
 
Figure 11: Gantt chart of the project 
  

EU Grants: HE CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-07 – 30.03.2022 
 
 
                                                       101091536- DiCiM- Part B - Page 33 of 45 
→  Work package description  
 See Annex 1 (part A) of the grant agreement 
3.1.2. List of Deliverables  
See Annex 1 (part A) of the grant agreement 
 
3.1.3. List of milestones  
See Annex 1 (part A) of the grant agreement 
 
3.1.4. Critical risks for implementation 
See Annex 1 (part A) of the grant agreement 
 Resources 
→ Summary of staff effort  
See Annex 1 (part A) of the grant agreement 
 
→  ‘Subcontracting costs’ items and ‘Other costs categories’ items  
No subcontracting costs envisaged for the project, nor other costs such as internally invoiced goods and services 
→ ‘Purchase costs’ items (travel and subsistence, equipment,  and other goods, 
works and services)  
1/ MU Cost Justification 
Travel €42,000 24 person-trips over 4 years; Average trip = €1,750 
Other €38,000 open access (10k), training materials including services of graphic (10k), research data 
collection (raw data) - 10k, conference fees (3k), audit (5k) 
Total €80,000  
 
2/ KTH Cost Justification 
Travel €42,000 24 person-trips over 4 years; Average trip = €1,750 
Other  €25,000 open access (12 k), Software licence ( 5 K) conference fees (3 k), audit (5 k) 
Total €67,000  
 
3/ TUC Cost Justification 
Travel €35,000 20 person-trips over 4 years; Average trip = €1,750 
Other €35,000 open access (5.5k), conference fees (3k), audit (6k); AR -tracking-software licences(7.5k); 
AR-Devices, associated computers, and interaction devices (10k), consumables (3k) 
Total €70,000  
 
4/ ULFS Cost Justification 
Travel €28,000 16 person-trips over 4 years; Average trip = €1,750 
Other €8,500 open access (5.5k), conference fees (3k) 
Total €36,500  
 
5/ IDENER Cost Justification 
Travel €28,000 16 person-trips over 4 years; Average trip = €1,750 
Total €28,000  
 
6/ IRIS Cost Justification 
Travel €28,000 16 person-trips over 4 years; Average trip = €1,750 
Other €30,000 Software licenses, server, pc, electronics and other consumables for model development 
and the monitoring system testing (25k), open access publication and conference fee (5k€); 
Total €58,000  
 
7/ SIG Cost Justification 
Travel €35,000 20 person-trips over 4 years; Average trip = €1,750 
Other €25,000 audit (5k), 20k IT-infrastructure/cloud-hosting 
Total €60,000  
 
EU Grants: HE CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-07 – 30.03.2022 
 
 
                                                       101091536- DiCiM- Part B - Page 34 of 45 
8/ C-ECO Cost Justification 
Travel €28,000 16 person-trips over 4 years; Average trip = €1,750 
Other €35,000 audit (5k), 25k IT-infrastructure/cloud-hosting, 5k AR-devices (data-goggles) 
Total €63,000  
 
9/ GOR Cost Justification 
Travel €35,000 20 person-trips over 4 years; Average trip = €1,750 
Other €50,000 sensors & new functionalities development of washing machine prototype electronics (50k) 
Total €85,000  
 
 
 
10/ ARCE Cost Justification 
Travel €35,000 20 person-trips over 4 years; Average trip = €1,750 
Equipment €35,000 The total depreciation costs (%50) of robot (15k), data acquisition system (3k), data server 
(5k), camera (2k), thermal camera (2k), electrical test kits (3k), sensors for odor 
measurement (5k) 
Other €6,000 electronic consumables (3k), conveyor prototype materials (3k) 
Total €76,000  
 
11/ LEX Cost Justification 
Travel €35,000 20 person-trips over 4 years; Average trip = €1,750 
Total €35,000  
 
12/ CHX Cost Justification 
Travel €35,000 20 person-trips over 4 years; Average trip = €1,750 
Other €36,038 Leaflets and labelled folders (€10k), 1 professional video (8,610€), 1 Helix event: €11k 
(event room, food, drink, etc).  Website: €6428 (domain purchase and maintenance)  
Total €71,038  
 
Additional justification: 
 
The consortium has budgeted for 232 person-trips which are detailed below. 
 
The DiCiM project is planning to have 9 General Assemblies (GAs) over 4 years. In each GA, on average 1.5 
persons/partner is estimated to participate which adds up to 162 person-trips. 20 person-trips are estimated 
for the review meetings. 
 
Besides, we are expecting 30 bilateral technical meetings among partners adding up to 30 person-trips. 
 
We are also expecting 20 person-trips for dissemination activities including scientific conferences.  
 
All the partners confirmed that all costs related to equipment include only the depreciation costs for the 
mentioned equipment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EU Grants: HE CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-07 – 30.03.2022 
 
 
                                                       101091536- DiCiM- Part B - Page 35 of 45 
3.2. Capacity of participants and consortium as a whole 
The consortium consists of 12 partners and 2 
advisory dodies  (Table 23) – gathering a 
unique mix of leading industry expertise and 
knowledge to develop and demonstrate 
integrated digital solutions to improve the 
efficiency and responsiveness of recovery value 
activities and for a successful implementation 
of the Circular Manufacturing System. 
The project will be coordinated by MU, that 
was already involved in the ReCiPSS flagship 
project, and has a strong track record in open 
science practices: following the principle of 
open access, all research results of scientists at 
MU are to be made freely accessible 
throughout the world and thus be rendered as visible 
as possible. MU supports all members of the 
university by means of general financial and structural 
conditions that have been created to achieve this 
objective. The project manager at MU will be Mr. 
David Póč, the Chief Strategy Officer at the Faculty 
and the Strategic Project Director at t he University 
(rectorate).  He has a background in Public 
Administration, History and Philosophy and long 
experience as the Head of the Project management 
team at the Faculty of Administration and Economics, 
responsible for the successful realization of al l 
projects both at the national and international levels.  
Gender balance  is aimed at all levels of project 
management. Both genders are represented at the 
task leader and group level, with women leading 4 
of the 9 work packages.  
APRA and ERC, the Automotive Parts Remanufacturers Association and the European Reman Council have an 
advisory role in the project. Both have committed to support the project as members of the Project Advisory 
Board (Figure 12), and participate in the joint dissemination and communication actions, as specified in Table 19. 
The consortium includes the key disciplines described in Table 10. With this composition, the consortium will be 
able to: 
• Develop refined, improved and/or new ML, DLT based and AR models and algorithms to unlock big data potential 
for value recovery in Europe (MU, KTH, TUC, ULFS, IDE, IRIS, SIG, C-ECO) 
• Aid the SMEs to develop and demonstrate of the potential of value recovery and value reuse (KTH, IRIS, SIG, C-
ECO, GOR, ARCE, LEX, CHX, APRA, ERC) 
• Increase the general public’s understanding of value recovery products as enablers of green transition and circular 
economy (CHX, APRA, ERC) 
• Influence decision-makers to evaluate the possibilities for standardisation in Europe in a socially, environmentally, 
and economically sustainable way (all) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 23: DiCiM consortium and supporting stakeholders 
Figure 12: Commitment letters from ERC (left) and APRA (right) 
EU Grants: HE CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-07 – 30.03.2022 
 
 
                                                       101091536- DiCiM- Part B - Page 36 of 45 
4. Ethics  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

EU Grants: HE CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-07 – 30.03.2022 
 
 
                                                       101091536- DiCiM- Part B - Page 37 of 45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

EU Grants: HE CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-07 – 30.03.2022 
 
 
                                                       101091536- DiCiM- Part B - Page 38 of 45 
Ethics Self-Assessment 
 
Ethical dimension of the objectives, methodology and likely impact 
No personal and sensitive data will be collected without the explicit and informed consent of the human participant 
and every information will be later accu rately pseudonymised and/or aggregated. As regards with secondary use of 
data (i.e. further processing of previously collected personal data) by Consortium partners, existing datasets will 
originate from a public source or be authorised for use in the research (either specifically for the project or generally 
for any secondary use). If there is the case, The Consortium will create a recruitment environment that is not only 
effective but isalso ethical, in the sense that maximises benefitsand minimises the risk of harm (psychological, social, 
legal, economic, environmental, etc.). The methods will unlikely result in discriminatory practices or  unfair 
treatment and complies with national and EU regulations. Participants will be recruited by letter or email including: 
info about how the person was identified; who is doing the research and why; what is involved and for how long; 
an overview of any  risks or potential benefits; info about how to contact the research team if interested in 
participating; where to get answers to additional questions, and when using email, proper notification about the 
confidentiality issues associated with email communication. After having proactively shown their interest in joining 
the project, datasubjects will be informed about the data processing and asked for their free, explicit and informed 
consent. All participants will be given a detailed information sheet and an informed consent form. 
Any document provided to the participants will be written in terms participants can understand and translated in 
the national languages if needed. Participation in the activities will always be voluntary, and participants will explicitly 
be informed that they can refuse to participate or withdraw their consent at any time without any consequences. 
The procedures that will be followed to obtain informed consent are: i) participants will be 
welcomed; ii) participants will be informed about the project and the specific activity in which they are involved, in 
an appropriate format according to their needs and the approved models of the consortium. Participants will be 
requested to give their ex plicit consent. The consent form and information sheet should be included on asingle 
piece of paper (both sides, if needed). We will not involve persons who have not attained the legal age for consent 
to participate in the research. Once the activity is finished, both the information sheet and the signed consent form 
will be sent by recorded mail to the Data Controller (to the email that will be identified at the beginning of the 
project). 
 
 
Compliance with ethical principles and relevant legislations 
Responsibility for protecting personal information under GDPR will extend to data processing as well as data 
controllers. 
Each consortium member agrees to comply with all obligationsand requirements of its corresponding national data 
protection legislation and the Data Protection Directive 95/46/EEC and to obtain all legal documents and 
certifications required for compliance with such legislation. The consortium membersagree that any background, 
results, confidential information and/or any and all data and/or information that is provided, disclosed or otherwise 
made available between the consortium member during the implementa tion of the project and/or for any 
exploitation activities (“Shared Information”), may include personal data as defined by Article 2,Section (a) of the 
Data Protection Directive (95/46/EEC), and applicable local implementing legislation (hereinafter referr ed to as 
“Personal Data”).Each consortium member who provides or otherwise make available to any other Party Shared 
Information containing Personal Data (“Contributor”) will represent that: (i) it has the authority and/or the 
authorisation to disclose the Shared Information, if any, which it provides to the consortium member; (ii) where 
legally required and relevant, it has obtained appropriate informed consents from all the datasubjects involved, or 
from any applicable institution, all in compliance with applicable regulations; and (iii) there is no restriction in place 
that would prevent any such another party from using the Shared Information in accordance with and for the 
purpose of the project. 
The Data Controller will be responsible for complying with all applicable data protection or similar laws regulating 
the processing of any Personal Data (assuch terms are defined in Directive 95/46/EC) provided by or through each 
Data Controller to the Dat a Processors.Each Data Processor will only process such Personal Data in a manner 
which is reasonably necessary to implement the Action and exploit the Results, and only for that purpose. Each 
Data Processor will follow the relevant Data Controller’s reaso nable processing instructions with respect to the 
Personal Data and the Data Processors will use their reasonable endeavours to apply the security measures set 
forth in the project, or as notified to the Data Processors in writing in advance. The Data Cont rollers are 
responsible for determining that these measures provide an appropriate level of protection.Either Data Processor 
shall not process any Personal Data unless (i) it isacting on the instructions of the Data Controllers (ii) it isacting 
to implement the project or exploit its results; or (iii) it is required to do so by applicable law or any court order, 
EU Grants: HE CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-07 – 30.03.2022 
 
 
                                                       101091536- DiCiM- Part B - Page 39 of 45 
in which case the relevant Data Processor shall inform the Data Controller(s) immediately in writing about such 
disclosure. 
The Data Processors, in implementing the project or exploiting its results, may transfer data, including Personal 
Data, across a country border, including outside the European Economic Area (EEA), if the Data Processor 
reasonably considers such transfer ap propriate or useful for the Data Processors' implementation of the Action 
and exploitation of the Results and reasonably cooperates with the Data  Controllers to meet legal requirements. 
The Data Controllers are solely responsible for determining that any t ransfer by the Data Processors or Data 
Controllers of data, including Personal Data, across a country border complies with the applicable data protection 
laws including assessing, determining and fulfilling any legal prerequisites or obtaining any required  authorizations. 
The Data Controllers agree that implementation of the project or exploitation of its results will be partially 
performed from abroad, and may entail that Personal Data are transferred outside the EEA. In view of this data 
transfer, each Data Controller will enter into aso -called Transfer Agreement (EUStandard Contractual Clausesas 
defined in the Commission Decision of February, 5th 2010, or any amendments thereto) with the Data Importer(s) 
in order to secure an adequate level of protection. Each Data Controller agrees to indemnify, defend and hold 
harmless the Data Importer from and against any claim by a third party arising under or relating to the Transfer 
Agreement.