3.3 Work plan and resources  #@WRK-PLA-WP@#

Brief presentation of the overall structure of the work plan: The 24-month workplan has been designed over 2 distinct project phases to enable the completion of 2 innovation loops in an iterative development process. In the Innovation Loop 1 (in phase 1) a co-creation process (T2.1) and experimental work (WP1) will inform the design and development of the dual LIBS-Raman spectroscopic fusion analyser (WP2), which will be installed in a prototype convey sorter and validated under laboratory-controlled conditions (TRL4 towards TRL5). In parallel, the GTM activities (WP3) will increase the market readiness. In Innovation Loop 2 (phase 2 of the project), the industry trials (WP4) validate the development work from phase 1, and the results from the industry processing trials (T4.2) will inform optimisation work (performed in T5.1), and future scale up work (T5.2) (TRL5- towards 6). In parallel, the technology will be demonstration to industry (in T6.1), and the GTM activities performed in WP6 will increase our investor readiness for securing financing for the industrialisation and market deployment phases to realise our business plan. The work plan will be underpinned by a cross-cutting project management activity that will also ensure Grant contractual activities are performed and impact measures (communication, dissemination and exploitation planning) are performed for project success.
Timing of the different work packages and their components and Graphical presentation of the components showing how they inter-relate

#§CON-SOR-CS§# #§PRJ-MGT-PM§#
Table 3.3a: List of work packages

Table 3.3b: Work package description
Table 3.3c: List of Deliverables
Table 3.3d: List of milestones
Table 3.3e: Critical risks for implementation #@RSK-MGT-RM@#
#§RSK-MGT-RM§#
Table 3.3f: Summary of staff effort
Table 3.3g: ‘Subcontracting costs’ items: N/A-No subcontracting has been budgeted.
Table 3.3h: ‘Purchase costs’ items (travel and subsistence, equipment and other goods, works and services)
#§QUA-LIT-QL§# #§WRK-PLA-WP§#
I confirm that this proposal builds on results achieved (minimum TRL 3) within eligible project(s). | Yes X | Yes X | No
Provide the related eligible Project(s) Acronym(s): REMADYL | Provide the related eligible Project(s) Acronym(s): REMADYL | Provide the related eligible Project(s) Acronym(s): REMADYL | Provide the related eligible Project(s) Acronym(s): REMADYL
Provide the related eligible Project(s) ID Number(s): Grant agreement ID: 821136 | Provide the related eligible Project(s) ID Number(s): Grant agreement ID: 821136 | Provide the related eligible Project(s) ID Number(s): Grant agreement ID: 821136 | Provide the related eligible Project(s) ID Number(s): Grant agreement ID: 821136
I confirm that the applicant(s) are the owner or have any necessary agreements with owners or right holders of those results, as described in the proposal. | Yes   X | No | No
Describe the result from the previous project on which your proposal is based. Is the result described the main result of the previous project?
In the Horizon 2020 REMADYL project (Jun 2019-Nov 2023), IRIS developed an identification and sorting system based on Laser Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy (LIBS) technology that was tested at-line in a recycling line processing PVC waste. This system is capable of detecting and sorting the PVC pieces according to the concentration of lead permitted in Regulation (EU) 2023/923, which revises the restriction of lead and its compounds falling under entry 63 to Annex XVII of Regulation (EC) No. 1907/2006 ‘Registration, Evaluation, Authorization and Restriction of Chemicals (entry 63 to Annex XVII of REACH) to <0.1% in PVC polymer and copolymer articles. 
The LIBS-based sorting process works as follows:
PVC waste pieces move through a conveyor belt
LIBS is used to focus a highly energetic laser pulse onto the surface of each PVC piece passing through the conveyor belt. A plasma is formed consisting of electronically excited atoms and ions. The radiation emitted from the plasma typically exhibits several spectral features, presenting the form of discrete or continuous spectra.
Machine Learning (ML) algorithms are capable of predicting, from the spectra generated for each PVC sample, if the concentration of lead is higher than 0.1%. 
A mechanical actuator sorts the PVC into the correct container according to the lead concentration in PVC.  
This innovation was one of a number of Key Exploitable Results from the project (others were an extractive extrusion technology in combination with novel solvents and melt filtration).
Describe the relation between the research result of the previous project and the innovation within the current proposal. Is the result from the previous project the main component of this proposal and how does it contribute to the innovation in this proposal?
While LIBS was selected in the REMADYL project as the technique of focus for the development of the REMADYL inspection system, the project afforded the opportunity for both the ideation and the first empirical attempt of synergistically combining two different albeit compatible technologies for chemical composition inspection: LIBS and Raman. In the EIC Transition project, the aim is to build on these results for the development of an innovative dual spectroscopic fusion analyser that will enable the detection of both elemental/atomic (LIBS) and molecular (Raman) compounds from the one inspection system (this is significant, as together they govern all chemical behaviour). Thanks to shared optomechanical hardware the device will be engineered to be compact and cost-efficient. The device will be further enhanced by hybrid ensembling machine learning data fusion for tackling complex and challenging real-time monitoring applications. This innovation will significantly increase the sensitivity and specificity, thereby widening the capabilities for more demanding industrial applications. This revolutionary device will be a powerful in-situ characterisation tool for numerous applications in on-line waste recycling, process industries, mining prospection, environmental monitoring, health, defence, and agriculture. The first online waste application will focus on plastic sorting and identification in the PVC recycling use case, whereby the optimised device will be implemented and validated in an industrial sorter.
Provide the link to the webpage where this result is reported (the periodic reporting, the Horizon results EU platform, the Innovation Radar or CORDIS).
https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/821136/results   
https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/portal/screen/opportunities/horizon-results-platform/78120?keywords=iris&isExactMatch=false&order=DESC&pageNumber=1&pageSize=50&sortBy=publicationDate
Elaborate and substantiate on the current TRL of the result of the previous project and of the innovation in this proposal at system level AND in relation to the intended final user application (e.g. clinical for health innovation, consumer for energy systems, etc.).
The LIBS inspection system developed in the REMADYL project was validated in a sorting system at line in Deceuninck’s PVC recycling facilities in Belgium and was able to successfully detect and sort 100% of white and grey rigid PVC (virgin and recycled) pieces measured during the validation tests, with lead contents ranging from 0 to 0.95%. Moreover, the technology concept of the combination of LIBS and Raman Spectroscopy was formulated and an experimental Proof of Concept (PoC) (TRL 3) performed, the results of which showed LIBS-RS to be capable of differentiating the amount of plasticizer (phthalates, like DOP, DEHP, DPHP) and concentration of stabilisers (B28, TBLS) present in PVC samples.
Describe the milestones already achieved in the development of the technology.
The key milestones achieved in the development of the technology are as follows: 
Evaluation of a number of spectroscopic detection techniques at lab-scale for their use as an in-line detection system for lead and plasticizer content in hard and soft PVC samples respectively.
Identification of LIBS as a suitable technology for the detection of lead and Raman and NIR technologies for the detection of plasticizers in soft PVC pieces.
Development of an at-line prototype for lead detection in PVC grinded end-of-life pieces, simulating industrial conditions but with much lower throughputs. The prototype included a basic feeder, a conveyor belt, an inspection module (LIBS-based), a computing system and a basic sorting system.
Development of a predictive model for the quantification of lead concentrations ranging from 0 to 1.5% by means of chemometrics and basic ML algorithms.
Validation of the LIB-based sorting system at Deceuninck facilities with real-production samples.
Tests with Raman and off-line data fusion.
Elaborate on the final TRL of the innovation aimed for at the end of the project.
In the EIC Transition project, we will go beyond the experimental PoC in the laboratory (TRL3), further testing and maturing the technology in the lab using a multi-spectroscopic experimental unit that serves as a powerful testbed for benchmarking the different physics of spectroscopic technologies and that employs hybrid ensembling for spectral data fusion (TRL4) which will inform the design and development of a hybrid measurement device and generate data for the building of ML models. The LIBS and Raman technologies will be engineered into a novel dual spectroscopic fusion analyser that will be integrated into a prototype sorter and validated in an industrially relevant PVC recycling environment at the Deceuninck recycling plant (TRL5). Processing trials at Deceuninck will enable further scaling and optimisation work with the prototype towards TRL6.
Segments | Raman | LIBS | Benefit
Plastic sorting & identification (incl. Filled/Coated Polymers) | Differentiates between polymers such as PET, HDPE, PP, PS, PVC. | Detects additives (e.g., TiO₂, CaCO₃) & hazardous elements (Cl in PVC, Br in flame retardants). | Accurate sorting even for black, multilayer, or coated plastics that challenge NIR systems.
E-waste recycling (printed circuit boards, cables, components) | Identifies polymeric binders, resins, and insulating materials. | Measures valuable metals (Cu, Au, Ag, rare earths) & hazardous elements (Pb, Hg, Cd). | Enables automated separation of high-value fractions and safe handling of toxic waste.
Battery recycling (Li-ion, NiMH, Lead-acid) | Detects electrode materials (graphite, LiCoO₂, LiFePO₄, binders). | Quantifies elemental Li, Co, Ni, Mn, Al, Fe | Rapid on-line classification of battery chemistries, crucial for safe dismantling and efficient material recovery.
Metals recycling & alloy sorting | Identifies oxide layers, corrosion, or coatings on metals. | Performs alloy fingerprinting (Al, Mg, Ti, Fe, Ni, stainless steels). | Inline sorting of mixed scrap into precise alloy grades, improving resale value & reducing downstream refining costs.
Glass & construction waste streams | Identifies silicate vs. polymer contamination, coatings, or embedded organic residues. | Measures elemental composition (Si, Na, Ca, Pb, heavy metals). | Differentiates leaded vs. unleaded glass, detects hazardous contaminants, and improves cullet purity for re-melting.
Types of data/research outputs and their estimated size. As part of the R&D, we will generate data in the lab testing samples with our multirange spectroscopy experimental unit, we will also be acquiring process data in the industry trials, among others. While we may not be able to disclose sensitive process data, we can show ordered data on the results of testing e.g. experimental images, text, numerical, etc.
Findability of data/research outputs. Use persistent & unique identifiers (eg digital object identifiers) & trusted repositories (Zenodo).
Accessibility of data/research outputs. Data will be deposited in Zenodo and made openly accessible. Data linked to IP will be available after IP protection mechanisms are in place; the aim is making research data available as soon as possible. Provisions will be made for providing controlled access to restricted data for verification purposes.
Interoperability of data/research outputs. Use of open, international and public available standards, e.g. CEN and ISO, such as ISO 10303 (for CAD, CAE/Simulations, PLM and sensor data (IoT) integrations, & data storage for ML applications) that: increase interoperability of information technology, addressed by data exchange & sharing solutions; enable common enterprise-wide views of information, addressed by data integration solutions; address obsolescence of information technology by data archiving solutions; promote freedom from vendor lock-in, addressed by open data solution. We will engage with UNE in Spain (representing CEN & CENELEC), with whom we regularly collaborate for standardization activities.
Reusability of data/research outputs. Where possible, we will make project data usable by third parties & available in the public domain to permit the widest re-use possible and licensed using standard reuse licences (e.g. Creative Commons, Open Data Commons). We will provide the documentation needed to validate data analysis and facilitate data re-use (e.g. readme files with information on methodology, codebooks, data cleaning, analyses, variable definitions, units of measurement, etc.). Data provenance will be documented using the appropriate standards & all relevant data quality assurance processes described.
Curation and storage/preservation costs. Research data/output management will be managed in Subtask 7.2.1 (Data Management and FAIR compliance). A core team with prior expertise in Data Management (and data quality assurance) will be mobilised under the leadership of Dr. David Nettleton from IRIS (a senior Data Scientist) as the Data Manager for the project. A reasonable budget has also been planned under ‘Other Costs, Works and Services’ for making data FAIR and for long term preservation.
Data Security. Data will be safely stored in trusted repositories for long term preservation and curation. Provisions will be made for data recovery as well as secure storage and transfer of sensitive data.
Regulatory and Ethical aspects. e.g. compliance with GDPR for any personal data gathered during the project.
Describe the path to market of the innovation beyond the duration of the project
One of the partners within consortium will directly exploit the innovation. Elaborate: IRIS Technology Solutions, as the sole beneficiary of this current proposal will directly exploit the innovation by further scaling up the Visum LRS in the post-project, with an estimated time-to-market of 24-36 months, whereby we will incorporate the product into our Visum line of real-time monitoring solutions. We will leverage a Distribution Strategy for reaching markets in Spain, Europe & internationally, thanks to our network of 19 distributors covering 27 countries across Europe (Spain, Portugal, France, Germany, Austria, Poland, Ukraine, Belgium, Switzerland, Greece, Turkey, Czech Rep., Slovakia, Netherlands), Latin America (Mexico, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, Venezuela, Brazil, Dominican Rep.), Asia (Japan, India, Pakistan, South Korea, Vietnam), N. Africa (Morocco).
Target Group | Goal | Key Message | Tools and channels
Potential customers | Early adopters (establish market credibility & generate case studies showcasing device  effectiveness); Lead generation; Awareness; Generate traction (LOIs, etc.) | Technology features (Datasheet), Value Proposition, ROI and enabler for compliance (via testimonials, Application Notes, Business Cases) | Outbound marketing strategy (email marketing campaigns, website, professional SM channels); Channel Partners, OEMs; Exhibitions and tradeshows; Face to face meetings
Scientific community | Knowledge sharing, Peer Review, Scientific validation opportunities; Partnerships for future R&D | Open Data.
Innovation and scientific excellence. | Zenodo; Scientific conferences; Peer review publications; Cordis, Horizon Results Platform
Industry associations/
clusters, Reg/Nat devt. agencies, Policy | Generate awareness and interest, increase our profile & positioning, attract investment | Impacts for competitiveness, sustainability, compliance. | Whitepapers; Business Plan (for investors); Publications
Public at large | Create awareness of environmental, social and economic benefits | Explain the technology & benefits understandable/engaging way | Video clips, infographics, etc. pushed out on SM
Identify which of the entity within, or beyond, the consortium, owning or licencing the IP rights, will be responsible of the path to market beyond the duration of the project.
IRIS Technology Solutions
KPI | Milestone | Risk | Mitigation
Technological | Accuracy: ≥ 98% both accuracy and recall or alternatively Matthews Correlation Coefficient ≥ 0.97  in detecting the presence of ≥0.1% w/w of lead contaminants (e.g. B28 or TBLS lead stabilisers) & differentiate amount of phthalate plasticisers (DOP or DPHP) present in PVC samples. | Achieve this accuracy in controlled laboratory conditions by M12 (and secure ≥ 90% and ≥0.95 respectively at conveyor belt speeds by M21). | Insufficient accuracy could result from technical challenges, e.g. interference or system sensitivity loss. | Conduct iterative system testing and calibration, using single- or double-pulse or simultaneous setups with time-gated detection. Use of diverse reference samples to fine-tune detection algorithms. Selection of sensors with improved sensitivity for application. Use of improved optical system configurations for boosting signal.
Technological | Speed: compatible with the typical industrial processor throughputs, i.e., conveyor belts running at 30 m/min | Reach target processing speed in operational conditions by M18. | Hardware limitations or computational loads slow down the process. | Optimise pipelines with lightweight models & GPU acceleration; use modular compute units; apply edge pre-filtering; tune acquisition settings in WP2 for ≥30 m/min throughput.
Technological | Reliability: Achieve >95% uptime during pilot deployments, ensuring continuous operation with minimal downtime. | Demonstrate reliability in industrial pilot project by M21. | Component failure or environmental factors could affect system performance. | Implement rigorous quality control measures & real-time monitoring systems to anticipate potential issues. Develop robust models with sufficient samples to include required variability.
Technological | Affordability: Achieve a production cost per unit that allows for a competitive selling price, ideally < €125k per system. | Confirm estimated production costs by M18, with a finalized cost model by M24. | Combination of LIBS-Raman leads to rising material costs or unforeseen manufacturing complexities that push price up. | Hardware sharing approach and data fusion synergy provides more than double the performance at a reduced cost.
Go-to-market | IPR assets: Protect IP (e.g. data fusion algorithms, hardware design) to support investor readiness & commercialisation. | Updated FTO confirmed by M6, and patent/utility model filed by M18. | FTO is negative, or delays in patent filing (incomplete/ unclear documentation) | Utility models as less restrictive strategy for IP protection. Trade secret strategy if patent/UM not possible.
Go-to-market | Regulatory Compliance: Obtain necessary certifications (e.g., CE marking, ISO standards) | Complete regulatory approvals in EU market by M24. | Delays in regulatory processes or failure to meet compliance standards. | Work with regulatory body (UNE) early in development process to anticipate & address potential issues.
Go-to-market | Market Traction: LOIs from ≥3 early adopters interested in post-project pilots; 1 OEM cooperation LOI signed. | All LOIs and expressions of interest by M21 | Industry resistance due to perceived high investment costs or integration challenges. | Early adopters engage. Offer discounted pilots, flexible leasing, subscription models, integration support package
Go-to-market | Distributor Validation: Commitment or validation from ≥80% of our global network of distributors to include the VISUM LRS in their sales portfolio. | Presentations/ demos to  all distributors by M18. Formal agreements or validation by M22. | Distributors may hesitate due to concerns about market readiness or overlap with existing products. | Provide clear data from pilot testing, demonstrate product-market fit, and show the potential for additional revenue streams.
# | Work Package Title | Lead No. | Lead Short Name | First name & family name of WP Leader | Gender of WP Leader | Person-Months | Start Month | End month
1 | Experimental work and model building | 1 | IRIS | Alejandro Rosales | Male | 27.5 | 1 | 12
3 | Design & Building of Hybrid LIBS-Raman Inspection System implemented in sorting system | 1 | IRIS | Dr. Laura Rodriguez | Female | 75.5 | 1 | 12
3 | Go-to-market activities (Phase 1) | 1 | IRIS | Dr. P. Guajardo | Female | 22.0 | 1 | 12
4 | Industry Trials and Validation | 1 | IRIS | Miquel Romero | Male | 21.5 | 13 | 24
5 | Technology Scale-Up and Industrialisation Roadmap | 1 | IRIS | Dr. L. Rodriguez | Female | 41.0 | 13 | 24
6 | Go-to-market activities (Phase 2) | 1 | IRIS | Dr. P. Guajardo | Female | 27.5 | 13 | 24
7 | Project Management, Impact and Inclusiveness | 1 | IRIS | Dr. L. Rodriguez | Female | 34.5 | 1 | 24
Total PMs | Total PMs | Total PMs | Total PMs | Total PMs | Total PMs | 249.5
I confirm that this is a Women-led consortium (the majority of the WP leaders plus the coordinator). | Yes  X       No
Work package number | 1
Work package title | Experimental work and model building
Objectives: To conduct experimental research and to develop advanced machine learning (ML) models to optimize the LIBS-Raman system’s performance. This includes preparing and analysing sample materials, benchmarking measurement techniques, and implementing spectral data fusion using hybrid ensembling to improve accuracy in material identification, which will result in ML fusion models (that will be implemented in the Fusion Engine in T2.4. | Objectives: To conduct experimental research and to develop advanced machine learning (ML) models to optimize the LIBS-Raman system’s performance. This includes preparing and analysing sample materials, benchmarking measurement techniques, and implementing spectral data fusion using hybrid ensembling to improve accuracy in material identification, which will result in ML fusion models (that will be implemented in the Fusion Engine in T2.4.
Description of work: Task 1.1 Sample Preparation and Design of Experiments (M1-2): We will prepare various PVC samples and other material samples for lab testing other use cases (provided by our early adopters from T2.1), which will be  representative of real-world conditions. For each sample set (use case) a structured design of experiments (DoE) will be used to systematically test different variables and conditions in T1.2. Task 1.2 Benchmarking of the Measurement Techniques and Hybrid Ensembling for Spectral Data Fusion (M1-6): Using the samples from T1.1, and in according to the DoE, we will evaluate and benchmark the performance of individual LIBS and Raman techniques, as well as their combined sequential use. A hybrid ensembling approach will be implemented to fuse the spectral data from both techniques to increase accuracy and reliability in detecting materials. The outputs of this task will generate data for use in T1.3 and will inform the designs and downscaling in T2.2. 
Task 1.3 Machine Learning Models (M5-12): We will develop & train ML models using experimental data from T1.2. The models will be designed to enhance the predictive power of the dual LIBS-Raman spectroscopic fusion analyser inspection system, improving its ability to classify materials based on spectral data & iteratively refined based on feedback from testing & benchmarking. | Description of work: Task 1.1 Sample Preparation and Design of Experiments (M1-2): We will prepare various PVC samples and other material samples for lab testing other use cases (provided by our early adopters from T2.1), which will be  representative of real-world conditions. For each sample set (use case) a structured design of experiments (DoE) will be used to systematically test different variables and conditions in T1.2. Task 1.2 Benchmarking of the Measurement Techniques and Hybrid Ensembling for Spectral Data Fusion (M1-6): Using the samples from T1.1, and in according to the DoE, we will evaluate and benchmark the performance of individual LIBS and Raman techniques, as well as their combined sequential use. A hybrid ensembling approach will be implemented to fuse the spectral data from both techniques to increase accuracy and reliability in detecting materials. The outputs of this task will generate data for use in T1.3 and will inform the designs and downscaling in T2.2. 
Task 1.3 Machine Learning Models (M5-12): We will develop & train ML models using experimental data from T1.2. The models will be designed to enhance the predictive power of the dual LIBS-Raman spectroscopic fusion analyser inspection system, improving its ability to classify materials based on spectral data & iteratively refined based on feedback from testing & benchmarking.
Work package number | 2
Work package title | Design and Building of Hybrid LIBS-Raman Inspection System implemented in a modular sorting system
Objectives: To design and build the dual LIBS-Raman spectroscopic fusion analyser for online waste recycling by integrating the LIBS-Raman hardware, implementing the spectral data fusion in a data management platform & installing the analyser in a prototype modular sorting unit. System performance for efficient & accurate material sorting will be tested. This WP builds on the experimental work & model development from WP1, incorporating industry cocreation, refining the system design, constructing the hardware, developing the data platform & performance testing in controlled conditions, prior to integration & validated in industry in WP4. | Objectives: To design and build the dual LIBS-Raman spectroscopic fusion analyser for online waste recycling by integrating the LIBS-Raman hardware, implementing the spectral data fusion in a data management platform & installing the analyser in a prototype modular sorting unit. System performance for efficient & accurate material sorting will be tested. This WP builds on the experimental work & model development from WP1, incorporating industry cocreation, refining the system design, constructing the hardware, developing the data platform & performance testing in controlled conditions, prior to integration & validated in industry in WP4.
Description of work: Task 2.1 Co-creation with Industry (M1-12): From project outset and in parallel with the experimental work being informed in WP1, we will engage industry collaborators to gather their inputs in order to inform the LIBS-Raman system's design with industry and market requirements. Insights will be gathered from ≥20 key industry early adopters and stakeholders (Deceuninck, Veolia, PreZero, INEOS, VYNOVA are already committed with LOIs, as is PICVISA (OEM), we have LOIs from A.SPIRE, ACCIO, NTUA & are engaged with UNE) in 4 targeted scoping sessions to gather stakeholder input, covering both industry and regulatory requirements for efficient sorting of PVC waste. This task will output a specification document, which will guide decisions on system usability, scalability of the system and its real-world applicability, ensuring it meets operational demands. KPIs will also be defined by the industry, which will be used to benchmark the success of the industry trials in WP4. This task will also provide samples to T1.1 (PVC samples from Deceuninck, but also early adopters will have the opportunity to provide additional sample types according to their strategic interests, which we will use for lab tests in T1.1. Insights and requirements from this task will also inform the GTM work in WP3 and WP6. Task 2.2 Downscaling Design Process (M3-36): Using the experimental results from T1.2, in this critical task we will downscale the LIBS-Raman system from the Fusion Multirange Spectroscopy Platform in a common hardware approach. The design will integrate WP1 findings in terms of the spectral data analysis, and sequential spectral fusion. The ultimate concept (how to tackle the challenges and how far we can take the specifications) is defined here, and effort will be dedicated to generating optimal ideas and plans as the best way for an efficient implementation phase. Task 2.3 Hardware Building (M5-12): Based on the designs from T2.2, the hybrid LIBS-Raman device will be built, and will integrate the optimized measurement techniques and spectral fusion models developed in WP1 into a physical system. This will include assembling the spectrometers, the shared laser and other key components, with as many of these components as possible being shared across the two measurement techniques (which is a disruption in our hardware approach), ensuring the system is robust, compact, affordable, and reliable for industrial-scale operations. Two prototype inspection systems will be built (and will be integrated in the sorting module in T2.5): one for Industry Validation work in WP4, and another will remain in IRIS for further development and optimisation in T5.1 and for demo purposes in T6.1. Task 2.4 Development of the Data Management Platform (M3-12): IRIS Scadalytics Data Management Platform will be adapted to acquire and process that data from the hybrid LIBS-Raman inspection device from T2.3 (as well as for collecting relevant data any other source- traditional sensors, MES, etc.). A Fusion Engine will also be implemented for handling the hybrid spectral data fusion implemented in WP1. The platform will be designed to handle, process and analyse the vast amounts of spectral data in real-time, as required by industrial applications, such as sorting materials accurately based on the machine learning models developed in T1.3. Task 2.5 Integration of the inspection system in a prototype sorting module and performance testing in laboratory-controlled conditions (M9-12): The inspection system (x2) will be installed in a prototype sorting module (x2) developed in IRIS, which will build on our experience and learnings from the REMADYL project and also taking into consideration a thorough analysis of the up to date integration strategy that will be codesigned in T2.1. The sorter will be fundamental for facilitating the industrial installation, and the initial strategy is to design and build a prototype sorting module as a ‘by-pass’ of the industrial line (and into which sample pieces will be routed and will exit the module according to their appropriate waste streams determined by the inspection system). We will conduct performance testing of the complete hardware and software system under controlled laboratory conditions in IRIS. This will validate the LIBS-Raman system’s accuracy, speed, and reliability (according to the defined KPIs), ensuring that the models and data fusion techniques from WP1 function effectively within the integrated system. Factory Acceptance Test (FAT) process will be performed, and the system will be qualified as ready for Industry integration and testing in WP4. | Description of work: Task 2.1 Co-creation with Industry (M1-12): From project outset and in parallel with the experimental work being informed in WP1, we will engage industry collaborators to gather their inputs in order to inform the LIBS-Raman system's design with industry and market requirements. Insights will be gathered from ≥20 key industry early adopters and stakeholders (Deceuninck, Veolia, PreZero, INEOS, VYNOVA are already committed with LOIs, as is PICVISA (OEM), we have LOIs from A.SPIRE, ACCIO, NTUA & are engaged with UNE) in 4 targeted scoping sessions to gather stakeholder input, covering both industry and regulatory requirements for efficient sorting of PVC waste. This task will output a specification document, which will guide decisions on system usability, scalability of the system and its real-world applicability, ensuring it meets operational demands. KPIs will also be defined by the industry, which will be used to benchmark the success of the industry trials in WP4. This task will also provide samples to T1.1 (PVC samples from Deceuninck, but also early adopters will have the opportunity to provide additional sample types according to their strategic interests, which we will use for lab tests in T1.1. Insights and requirements from this task will also inform the GTM work in WP3 and WP6. Task 2.2 Downscaling Design Process (M3-36): Using the experimental results from T1.2, in this critical task we will downscale the LIBS-Raman system from the Fusion Multirange Spectroscopy Platform in a common hardware approach. The design will integrate WP1 findings in terms of the spectral data analysis, and sequential spectral fusion. The ultimate concept (how to tackle the challenges and how far we can take the specifications) is defined here, and effort will be dedicated to generating optimal ideas and plans as the best way for an efficient implementation phase. Task 2.3 Hardware Building (M5-12): Based on the designs from T2.2, the hybrid LIBS-Raman device will be built, and will integrate the optimized measurement techniques and spectral fusion models developed in WP1 into a physical system. This will include assembling the spectrometers, the shared laser and other key components, with as many of these components as possible being shared across the two measurement techniques (which is a disruption in our hardware approach), ensuring the system is robust, compact, affordable, and reliable for industrial-scale operations. Two prototype inspection systems will be built (and will be integrated in the sorting module in T2.5): one for Industry Validation work in WP4, and another will remain in IRIS for further development and optimisation in T5.1 and for demo purposes in T6.1. Task 2.4 Development of the Data Management Platform (M3-12): IRIS Scadalytics Data Management Platform will be adapted to acquire and process that data from the hybrid LIBS-Raman inspection device from T2.3 (as well as for collecting relevant data any other source- traditional sensors, MES, etc.). A Fusion Engine will also be implemented for handling the hybrid spectral data fusion implemented in WP1. The platform will be designed to handle, process and analyse the vast amounts of spectral data in real-time, as required by industrial applications, such as sorting materials accurately based on the machine learning models developed in T1.3. Task 2.5 Integration of the inspection system in a prototype sorting module and performance testing in laboratory-controlled conditions (M9-12): The inspection system (x2) will be installed in a prototype sorting module (x2) developed in IRIS, which will build on our experience and learnings from the REMADYL project and also taking into consideration a thorough analysis of the up to date integration strategy that will be codesigned in T2.1. The sorter will be fundamental for facilitating the industrial installation, and the initial strategy is to design and build a prototype sorting module as a ‘by-pass’ of the industrial line (and into which sample pieces will be routed and will exit the module according to their appropriate waste streams determined by the inspection system). We will conduct performance testing of the complete hardware and software system under controlled laboratory conditions in IRIS. This will validate the LIBS-Raman system’s accuracy, speed, and reliability (according to the defined KPIs), ensuring that the models and data fusion techniques from WP1 function effectively within the integrated system. Factory Acceptance Test (FAT) process will be performed, and the system will be qualified as ready for Industry integration and testing in WP4.
Work package number | 3
Work package title | Go to Market Activities - Phase 1
Objectives: To perform the first phase of GTM activities to gear up & increase readiness for the future market entry phase of LIBS-Raman inspection system by conducting a comprehensive analysis of market opportunities, defining certification requirements, monitoring competitors & advancing progress in terms of business model design & strategy for its verification in phase 2 of project. | Objectives: To perform the first phase of GTM activities to gear up & increase readiness for the future market entry phase of LIBS-Raman inspection system by conducting a comprehensive analysis of market opportunities, defining certification requirements, monitoring competitors & advancing progress in terms of business model design & strategy for its verification in phase 2 of project.
Description of work: Task 3.1 Market Analysis and Segmentation (M1-12): This task will conduct a thorough market analysis to identify key segments for the LIBS-Raman system. We will analyse the full market potential for the Visum LRS in consultation with our growing network of (19) European and international distributors, through field research, as well as interviews with each distribution to gather their expert knowledge, and to identify market reports and information. We will then segment the market based on industry needs. The analysis will provide a clear understanding of where the system can deliver the most value, driving the focus for our commercialisation roadmap. This task will also receive relevant inputs from the cocreation scoping sessions in T2.1 regarding requirements and business motivations of distinct industry segments, and insights into the buying processes in the early adopters. 
Task 3.2 Standards Requirements and Certification-by-Design (M1-12): In the first month of the project, we will engage with UNE in Madrid, to perform an up-to-date review of all the relevant standards and certification requirements needed for the LIBS-Raman system to enter key markets. This will allow the certification processes will be integrated into the design of the system from the outset (informing work in WP1 and WP2), ensuring that it is compliant with industry standards such as CE marking or ISO certifications, which are important for market launch and commercialisation. Meet with UNE ≥every 6 months to review the process. 
Task 3.3 Competitor Monitoring, Technology Watch & IP Strategy Implementation (M1-12): In this task, we will actively monitor competitors and industry trends to ensure the LIBS-Raman system remains competitive. Technology watch (using a Technology Watch process that is established in our Innovation processes in IRIS) will keep us updated on emerging innovations. We will also engage with our patent and IP attorney, ClarkeModet, to perform an up-to-date and thorough FTO study, and to implement our IP strategy to protect our technological advancement via patent or utility model filings and/or other IPR tools (trade secrets, copyright, trademark) to maintain a competitive edge in the market. Task 3.4 Business Model Design and Business Planning (M1-12): Leveraging the market insights from T3.1, as well as the progress from T3.3, in addition to the performance and features of the Visum LRS based on the technological progress made in WP1 and WP2, using the Business Model Canvas tool, we will design business models for the LIBS-Raman system for the key market segments defined in T3.1 (the PCV recycling, along with the prioritised additional segments that we fill focus our market roll out strategy on which will benefit from learning from T2.1). We will define pricing strategies, distribution channels, and revenue models, tailored to the market segments identified. First version of the business plan will be prepared, including a roadmap for commercialisation, and financial viability assessment. | Description of work: Task 3.1 Market Analysis and Segmentation (M1-12): This task will conduct a thorough market analysis to identify key segments for the LIBS-Raman system. We will analyse the full market potential for the Visum LRS in consultation with our growing network of (19) European and international distributors, through field research, as well as interviews with each distribution to gather their expert knowledge, and to identify market reports and information. We will then segment the market based on industry needs. The analysis will provide a clear understanding of where the system can deliver the most value, driving the focus for our commercialisation roadmap. This task will also receive relevant inputs from the cocreation scoping sessions in T2.1 regarding requirements and business motivations of distinct industry segments, and insights into the buying processes in the early adopters. 
Task 3.2 Standards Requirements and Certification-by-Design (M1-12): In the first month of the project, we will engage with UNE in Madrid, to perform an up-to-date review of all the relevant standards and certification requirements needed for the LIBS-Raman system to enter key markets. This will allow the certification processes will be integrated into the design of the system from the outset (informing work in WP1 and WP2), ensuring that it is compliant with industry standards such as CE marking or ISO certifications, which are important for market launch and commercialisation. Meet with UNE ≥every 6 months to review the process. 
Task 3.3 Competitor Monitoring, Technology Watch & IP Strategy Implementation (M1-12): In this task, we will actively monitor competitors and industry trends to ensure the LIBS-Raman system remains competitive. Technology watch (using a Technology Watch process that is established in our Innovation processes in IRIS) will keep us updated on emerging innovations. We will also engage with our patent and IP attorney, ClarkeModet, to perform an up-to-date and thorough FTO study, and to implement our IP strategy to protect our technological advancement via patent or utility model filings and/or other IPR tools (trade secrets, copyright, trademark) to maintain a competitive edge in the market. Task 3.4 Business Model Design and Business Planning (M1-12): Leveraging the market insights from T3.1, as well as the progress from T3.3, in addition to the performance and features of the Visum LRS based on the technological progress made in WP1 and WP2, using the Business Model Canvas tool, we will design business models for the LIBS-Raman system for the key market segments defined in T3.1 (the PCV recycling, along with the prioritised additional segments that we fill focus our market roll out strategy on which will benefit from learning from T2.1). We will define pricing strategies, distribution channels, and revenue models, tailored to the market segments identified. First version of the business plan will be prepared, including a roadmap for commercialisation, and financial viability assessment.
Work package number | 4
Work package title | Industry Trials and Validation
Objectives: ■To install, trial, and validate the dual LIBS-Raman spectroscopic fusion analyser and sorting system from WP2 in real-world industrial PVC recycling facilities, to assess the system’s performance in processing trials & validate its operational effectiveness. This will inform optimisation work in T5.1 & future scale up and system implementation strategies in T5.2. ■ To perform an impact assessment to evaluate the system’s efficiency & compliance with regulatory standards (will inform WP6 with insights on potential market impact). | Objectives: ■To install, trial, and validate the dual LIBS-Raman spectroscopic fusion analyser and sorting system from WP2 in real-world industrial PVC recycling facilities, to assess the system’s performance in processing trials & validate its operational effectiveness. This will inform optimisation work in T5.1 & future scale up and system implementation strategies in T5.2. ■ To perform an impact assessment to evaluate the system’s efficiency & compliance with regulatory standards (will inform WP6 with insights on potential market impact).
Description of work: Task 4.1 Installation in Industrial PVC Recycling Facilities (M13-14): This task involves the physical installation of the LIBS-Raman sorting system from T2.5 in the PVC recycling plant at Deceuninck’s Diksmuide facility in Belgium and based on the integration strategy that will have researched with them in T2.1. As mentioned, the LIBS-Raman system installed in a module sorting ‘by-pass’ unit will be initially the proposed strategy, which will greatly facilitate integration and operational fluidity based on a routing approach. Functionality tests will be performed to ensure the system is operating correctly, and the operators will be trained on the use of the system so that processing trials can commence in T4.2. Task 4.2 Processing Trials (M15-24): After successful installation and setup of the system in T4.1, processing trials will be conducted to assess the system’s ability to sort materials accurately and efficiently in an industrial setting, testing LIBS-Raman system’s performance under typical operating conditions, verifying its speed, accuracy, and reliability in sorting  PVC pieces in accordance with the predefined KPIs. Feedback for optimisation work will be systematically gathered and fed into T5.1, so that iterative technical improvements can be made. Site Acceptance Test (SAT) process completed at the end of the Processing Trials. Task 4.3 Validation and Impact Assessment (M17-21): Focuses on validating the system’s overall performance during the trials in T4.2 & assessing its broader impact. The validation will ensure the system meets the industry requirements defined in T2.1, and the required performance benchmarks, regulatory standards, and market needs identified in WP3. Feedback for optimisation work will be systematically gathered & fed into T5.1 so that iterative technical improvements can be made. The impact assessment will evaluate the system’s operational efficiency, environmental benefits, and potential for scaling across waste recycling industry, informing WP6, supporting the phase 2 GTM activities for market entry planning by providing concrete evidence of the system’s value in a real-world industrial context. | Description of work: Task 4.1 Installation in Industrial PVC Recycling Facilities (M13-14): This task involves the physical installation of the LIBS-Raman sorting system from T2.5 in the PVC recycling plant at Deceuninck’s Diksmuide facility in Belgium and based on the integration strategy that will have researched with them in T2.1. As mentioned, the LIBS-Raman system installed in a module sorting ‘by-pass’ unit will be initially the proposed strategy, which will greatly facilitate integration and operational fluidity based on a routing approach. Functionality tests will be performed to ensure the system is operating correctly, and the operators will be trained on the use of the system so that processing trials can commence in T4.2. Task 4.2 Processing Trials (M15-24): After successful installation and setup of the system in T4.1, processing trials will be conducted to assess the system’s ability to sort materials accurately and efficiently in an industrial setting, testing LIBS-Raman system’s performance under typical operating conditions, verifying its speed, accuracy, and reliability in sorting  PVC pieces in accordance with the predefined KPIs. Feedback for optimisation work will be systematically gathered and fed into T5.1, so that iterative technical improvements can be made. Site Acceptance Test (SAT) process completed at the end of the Processing Trials. Task 4.3 Validation and Impact Assessment (M17-21): Focuses on validating the system’s overall performance during the trials in T4.2 & assessing its broader impact. The validation will ensure the system meets the industry requirements defined in T2.1, and the required performance benchmarks, regulatory standards, and market needs identified in WP3. Feedback for optimisation work will be systematically gathered & fed into T5.1 so that iterative technical improvements can be made. The impact assessment will evaluate the system’s operational efficiency, environmental benefits, and potential for scaling across waste recycling industry, informing WP6, supporting the phase 2 GTM activities for market entry planning by providing concrete evidence of the system’s value in a real-world industrial context.
Work package number | 5
Work package title | Technology Scale-Up and Industrialisation Roadmap
Objectives: To optimise the LIBS-Raman sorting system based on insights from industry trials in WP3 (as a preliminary step in the productisation stage to be tackled in the post-project) & develop a comprehensive roadmap for scaling the technology from TRL7 to 9 to ensure the system is prepared for post-project industrial-scale deployment, identifying the necessary technical improvements, operational control, and financial & strategic planning needed for large-scale production (will inform final Business Plan in T6.4). | Objectives: To optimise the LIBS-Raman sorting system based on insights from industry trials in WP3 (as a preliminary step in the productisation stage to be tackled in the post-project) & develop a comprehensive roadmap for scaling the technology from TRL7 to 9 to ensure the system is prepared for post-project industrial-scale deployment, identifying the necessary technical improvements, operational control, and financial & strategic planning needed for large-scale production (will inform final Business Plan in T6.4).
Description of work: Task 5.1 Optimisation Work to the Prototype Based on Industry Integration and Testing (M13-22): LIBS-Raman system prototype will be optimised using data and feedback from the industry trials conducted in WP4 addressing any technical issues that emerged during the installation in T4.1 and the processing trials in T4.2, such as improving sorting accuracy, speed, or integration with existing conveyor systems. This task will also channel additional improvements and future necessary developments to the Technology Scale-Up Roadmap that will be drawn up in T5.3. Task 5.2 Technology Scale-Up Roadmap Definition and Costing (TRL7-9) (M20-24): Involves defining a detailed roadmap for scaling the technology from TRL7 to TRL9, including cost estimates (which will inform the final Business Plan developed in T6.4). This roadmap will outline the steps needed to move from a validated prototype (TRL5-6) to full industrialisation, including production scaling for market deployment. | Description of work: Task 5.1 Optimisation Work to the Prototype Based on Industry Integration and Testing (M13-22): LIBS-Raman system prototype will be optimised using data and feedback from the industry trials conducted in WP4 addressing any technical issues that emerged during the installation in T4.1 and the processing trials in T4.2, such as improving sorting accuracy, speed, or integration with existing conveyor systems. This task will also channel additional improvements and future necessary developments to the Technology Scale-Up Roadmap that will be drawn up in T5.3. Task 5.2 Technology Scale-Up Roadmap Definition and Costing (TRL7-9) (M20-24): Involves defining a detailed roadmap for scaling the technology from TRL7 to TRL9, including cost estimates (which will inform the final Business Plan developed in T6.4). This roadmap will outline the steps needed to move from a validated prototype (TRL5-6) to full industrialisation, including production scaling for market deployment.
Work package number | 6
Work package title | Go-to-Market Activities – Phase 2
Objectives: To validate problem-solution fit, ensure certification and regulatory compliance, continue to monitor competitors and implement IP strategies, and finalise the business model and investor-ready business plan. | Objectives: To validate problem-solution fit, ensure certification and regulatory compliance, continue to monitor competitors and implement IP strategies, and finalise the business model and investor-ready business plan.
Description of work: T6.1 Problem-Solution Fit and Showcasing to Industry (M13-24): The LIBS-Raman system’s ability to address specific industry pain points will be further validated through direct engagement and showcasing. Demonstrations and presentations will be conducted for key industry stakeholders, focusing on how the system meets the challenges identified in WP3’s market analysis. Feedback from these industry engagements will further refine the product-market fit, ensuring the system is positioned for adoption in relevant sectors. T6.2 Certification and Compliance: The LIBS-Raman system will undergo the necessary certification and compliance processes to meet industry-specific regulations, such as safety and environmental standards. Building on the certification requirements identified in WP3, the goal is to secure approvals (e.g., CE marking, ISO certifications) that allow the system to be legally deployed in the target markets. This task ensures the system is fully compliant with regulatory standards before commercial launch. We will discuss with UNE the opportunity to contribute to standards as a consequence of improve the Limit of Detection (LoD). T6.3 Competitor Monitoring, Technology Watch & IP Strategy Implementation (M13-24): Continuing the work initiated in WP3, this task focuses on monitoring competitor activities and technological developments to ensure the LIBS-Raman system remains competitive. The IP strategy developed earlier will be actively managed, including patent/utility model filings and IP portfolio strengthening, to protect key innovations and maintain market advantage. Technology watch activities will ensure that emerging trends are incorporated into ongoing development efforts. T6.4 Business Model Validation and Investor-Ready Business Plan (M13-24):This task finalises the business model for the LIBS-Raman system, ensuring that it is aligned with industry needs and market conditions. The validation will comprehend the potential applicability to wider scenarios (in cooperation with T5.2), which would expand the expected outcomes. The business plan will incorporate insights from previous market analysis and industry feedback, providing a clear, investor-ready strategy. Financial projections, pricing models, and scalability plans will be validated to ensure the business plan is solid and attractive to potential investors, ensuring the project is fully prepared for investment and market entry. Build credibility through industry events, conferences, and white papers highlighting the success of the pilot projects. Use case studies and testimonials from early adopters to demonstrate the LIBS-Raman system’s effectiveness in solving critical pain points in industries dealing with hazardous materials. Digital marketing campaigns will target industry sectors, along with thought leadership pieces on regulatory compliance to raise awareness. | Description of work: T6.1 Problem-Solution Fit and Showcasing to Industry (M13-24): The LIBS-Raman system’s ability to address specific industry pain points will be further validated through direct engagement and showcasing. Demonstrations and presentations will be conducted for key industry stakeholders, focusing on how the system meets the challenges identified in WP3’s market analysis. Feedback from these industry engagements will further refine the product-market fit, ensuring the system is positioned for adoption in relevant sectors. T6.2 Certification and Compliance: The LIBS-Raman system will undergo the necessary certification and compliance processes to meet industry-specific regulations, such as safety and environmental standards. Building on the certification requirements identified in WP3, the goal is to secure approvals (e.g., CE marking, ISO certifications) that allow the system to be legally deployed in the target markets. This task ensures the system is fully compliant with regulatory standards before commercial launch. We will discuss with UNE the opportunity to contribute to standards as a consequence of improve the Limit of Detection (LoD). T6.3 Competitor Monitoring, Technology Watch & IP Strategy Implementation (M13-24): Continuing the work initiated in WP3, this task focuses on monitoring competitor activities and technological developments to ensure the LIBS-Raman system remains competitive. The IP strategy developed earlier will be actively managed, including patent/utility model filings and IP portfolio strengthening, to protect key innovations and maintain market advantage. Technology watch activities will ensure that emerging trends are incorporated into ongoing development efforts. T6.4 Business Model Validation and Investor-Ready Business Plan (M13-24):This task finalises the business model for the LIBS-Raman system, ensuring that it is aligned with industry needs and market conditions. The validation will comprehend the potential applicability to wider scenarios (in cooperation with T5.2), which would expand the expected outcomes. The business plan will incorporate insights from previous market analysis and industry feedback, providing a clear, investor-ready strategy. Financial projections, pricing models, and scalability plans will be validated to ensure the business plan is solid and attractive to potential investors, ensuring the project is fully prepared for investment and market entry. Build credibility through industry events, conferences, and white papers highlighting the success of the pilot projects. Use case studies and testimonials from early adopters to demonstrate the LIBS-Raman system’s effectiveness in solving critical pain points in industries dealing with hazardous materials. Digital marketing campaigns will target industry sectors, along with thought leadership pieces on regulatory compliance to raise awareness.
Work package number | 7
Work package title | Project Management, Impact & Inclusiveness (across Phase 1 & Phase 2)
Objectives: ■ To manage and monitor the project over the course of its two phases to ensure the work is delivered to the highest quality in fulfilment with the project objectives, its schedule and budget; ■ To continuously manage risk for early anomaly detection and effective mitigation strategies; ■ To draw up, maintain & implement a robust Data Management Plan; ■ To ensure project adheres to Open Science principles; ■ To manage the ‘gender innovation’ approach and provide quarterly internal reports to the implementation teams; ■ To plan, execute and monitor Communication, Dissemination and Exploitation activities for high impact. | Objectives: ■ To manage and monitor the project over the course of its two phases to ensure the work is delivered to the highest quality in fulfilment with the project objectives, its schedule and budget; ■ To continuously manage risk for early anomaly detection and effective mitigation strategies; ■ To draw up, maintain & implement a robust Data Management Plan; ■ To ensure project adheres to Open Science principles; ■ To manage the ‘gender innovation’ approach and provide quarterly internal reports to the implementation teams; ■ To plan, execute and monitor Communication, Dissemination and Exploitation activities for high impact.
Description of work: Task 7.1 Project Management: structure and procedures [M1-M24]: Science and Engineering Manager in IRIS will lead Project Management, supported by the team in the PMO Department. She will lead project monitoring and control (to ensure the work is delivered on time, to budget and to the expected scope/quality). The organisation structure consists of the Management Board (MB) in IRIS (CEO, CTO, COO, SCO) & Managers of Implementation Teams (Science and Engineering Team, Digital Team, Production Team, Sales and Marketing Team) & Project Manager (PM). PM oversees day-to-day running of the project, assisted by the PMO Services team in administrative and financial management activities. Project management will be enabled by using a digital collaboration tool. The following meetings will facilitate effective monitoring, control, planning and communication across the internal teams (organised and Chaired by the PM): launch meeting (internal KO meeting) involving the MB, Implementation Teams & their managers; weekly project meetings with the PM, Team Managers and key members of their Implementation teams; internal Quarterly Review Meetings with the Management Board, ahead of which a Quarterly Internal Report will be prepared by the PM and circulated to the attendees. Fulfilment of project schedule and milestones will be monitored. Consistency with the budget will be controlled. The PM will ensure that our contractual requirements with the funding body are fulfilled, and all deliverables are completed on time and to a high quality, that all reports are submitted diligently, completely & on time, and that we engage appropriately with our Project Officer. Task 7.2 Data Management, Open Science and Gender Dimension [M1-M24] The work is divided into 3 subtasks: Subtask 5.2.1 Data Management and FAIR compliance: Data Manager will lead the work in relation to sound data management in compliance with FAIR practices and GDPR. Data Management Plan (D7.1) will be drawn up, maintained and implemented by M6- and regularly updated (at least every 6 months)- outlining: data that will be generated during research; metadata, standards and quality assurance measures; plans for sharing data; copyright and IPRs of data; data storage and back-up measures; data management roles and responsibilities. ST5.2.2 Open Science: Adherence of project with 'open science' principles will be managed to ensure: 1) early and open sharing of research; 2) promote open access to research data & other related research outputs; 3) effective research output management; 4) implementation of measures to ensure reproducibility of research outputs; 5) meaningful involvement of relevant stakeholders in the cocreation of content. This work will link with data management (T5.2.1), communication and dissemination, IP management (T7.3). ST5.2.3 Gender Dimension: This task will manage & implement issues related to ‘gendered innovations’ employing methods of sex, gender & intersectional analysis as possible source for new knowledge creation. Quarterly internal reports will be delivered to implementation teams.
Task 7.3 Communication, Dissemination and Exploitation activities [M1-M24] Divided in 3 subtasks & planned in detail in D7.2 & progress reported every 6 months: Subtask 7.3.1 Communication activities: Communication Plan will be further elaborated & implemented based on preliminary plan in Section 2.1. Subtask 7.3.2 Dissemination activities: further planned and implemented based on plan outlined in Section 2.1 Subtask 7.3.3 Exploitation activities: post-project exploitation plan will be prepared. | Description of work: Task 7.1 Project Management: structure and procedures [M1-M24]: Science and Engineering Manager in IRIS will lead Project Management, supported by the team in the PMO Department. She will lead project monitoring and control (to ensure the work is delivered on time, to budget and to the expected scope/quality). The organisation structure consists of the Management Board (MB) in IRIS (CEO, CTO, COO, SCO) & Managers of Implementation Teams (Science and Engineering Team, Digital Team, Production Team, Sales and Marketing Team) & Project Manager (PM). PM oversees day-to-day running of the project, assisted by the PMO Services team in administrative and financial management activities. Project management will be enabled by using a digital collaboration tool. The following meetings will facilitate effective monitoring, control, planning and communication across the internal teams (organised and Chaired by the PM): launch meeting (internal KO meeting) involving the MB, Implementation Teams & their managers; weekly project meetings with the PM, Team Managers and key members of their Implementation teams; internal Quarterly Review Meetings with the Management Board, ahead of which a Quarterly Internal Report will be prepared by the PM and circulated to the attendees. Fulfilment of project schedule and milestones will be monitored. Consistency with the budget will be controlled. The PM will ensure that our contractual requirements with the funding body are fulfilled, and all deliverables are completed on time and to a high quality, that all reports are submitted diligently, completely & on time, and that we engage appropriately with our Project Officer. Task 7.2 Data Management, Open Science and Gender Dimension [M1-M24] The work is divided into 3 subtasks: Subtask 5.2.1 Data Management and FAIR compliance: Data Manager will lead the work in relation to sound data management in compliance with FAIR practices and GDPR. Data Management Plan (D7.1) will be drawn up, maintained and implemented by M6- and regularly updated (at least every 6 months)- outlining: data that will be generated during research; metadata, standards and quality assurance measures; plans for sharing data; copyright and IPRs of data; data storage and back-up measures; data management roles and responsibilities. ST5.2.2 Open Science: Adherence of project with 'open science' principles will be managed to ensure: 1) early and open sharing of research; 2) promote open access to research data & other related research outputs; 3) effective research output management; 4) implementation of measures to ensure reproducibility of research outputs; 5) meaningful involvement of relevant stakeholders in the cocreation of content. This work will link with data management (T5.2.1), communication and dissemination, IP management (T7.3). ST5.2.3 Gender Dimension: This task will manage & implement issues related to ‘gendered innovations’ employing methods of sex, gender & intersectional analysis as possible source for new knowledge creation. Quarterly internal reports will be delivered to implementation teams.
Task 7.3 Communication, Dissemination and Exploitation activities [M1-M24] Divided in 3 subtasks & planned in detail in D7.2 & progress reported every 6 months: Subtask 7.3.1 Communication activities: Communication Plan will be further elaborated & implemented based on preliminary plan in Section 2.1. Subtask 7.3.2 Dissemination activities: further planned and implemented based on plan outlined in Section 2.1 Subtask 7.3.3 Exploitation activities: post-project exploitation plan will be prepared.
# | Deliverable name | Short description | WP | Lead | Type | Diss. level | Due
D1.1 | Benchmarking of Measurement Techniques & Spectral Data Fusion | Information from experiments to guide the prototype design & development process in WP2 | 1 | IRIS | R | SEN | M6
D1.2 | Final Machine learning model | LIBS-Raman data fusion algorithm | 1 | IRIS | OTHR | SEN | M10
D1.3 | Multirange spectroscopy & Hybrid Ensembling for optical and spectral data fusion | Public Reports (Whitepaper, Thought Leadership Article, & Submission of a Publication to Open Access Journal) | 1 | IRIS | R | PU | M12
D2.1 | Final report from the Industry scoping sessions | From M1 inputs will be fed to implementation team on industry and standards requirements and KPIs | 2 | IRIS | R | SEN | M4
D2.2 | Prototype of dual LIBS-Raman spectroscopic fusion analyser | Fully functional incl. HW and SW components | 2 | IRIS | DEM | SEN | M10
D2.3 | Sorting module | ‘By-pass’ Conveyor sub-system | 2 | IRIS | DEM | SEN | M12
D2.4 | Data management platform | Data collection, processing & running fusion engine in prediction mode | 2 | IRIS | OTHR | SEN | M12
D2.5 | User Manuals | In downloadable PDF format | 2 | IRIS | OTHR | PU | M12
D3.1 | Certification and standards compliance report | Outlining steps for obtaining certifications, regulatory approvals | 3 | IRIS | R | SEN | M4
D3.2 | Market analysis report | Incl. segmentation and target customer profiles | 3 | IRIS | R | SEN | M12
D3.3 | Draft Business Model | Based on Lean Canvas Tool | 3 | IRIS | R | SEN | M12
D3.4 | Draft Business Plan | 1st version of the BP | 3 | IRIS | R | SEN | M12
D4.1 | Installation SAT report | Documenting system integration into a PVC recycling conveyor | 4 | IRIS | R | SEN | M14
D4.2 | Validation and impact assessment report | Business Case: Summarising the results of processing trials vs. KPIs | 4 | IRIS | OTHR | PU | M20
D5.1 | Optimised system prototype | Incl. upgrades based on industry trial feedback | 5 | IRIS | DEM | SEN | M22
D5.2 | Technology scale-up roadmap | Report on further developments & costings for post-project scaling: TRL7-8 and TRL9 | 5 | IRIS | R | SEN | M24
D6.1 | Demo Presentation Package | Information handouts demo attendees | 6 | IRIS | R | PU | M18
D6.2 | Market validation report | Incl. commitments from early adopters | 6 | IRIS | R | SEN | M21
D6.3 | Report on IP Management | Includes result of FTO analysis and status of IPRs | 6 | IRIS | R | SEN | M22
D6.4 | Final Business Model | Verified Business Model | 6 | IRIS | R | SEN | M23
D6.5 | Final Business Plan | Final investor-ready BP | 6 | IRIS | R | SEN | M24
D7.1 | Data Management Plan | Updated biannually. | 7 | IRIS | DMP | PU | M6
D7.2 | Plan for dissemination and exploitation, incl. communication | Plan of PDEC activities, monitored & updated every 6 months. | 7 | IRIS | R | PU | M6/12/18/24
D7.3 | Project website | Housed in the IRIS website & regularly updated | 7 | IRIS | DEC | PU | M4
D7.4 | Video clips on project & progress | ≥4 Short clips, video tutorials and demo videos | 7 | IRIS | DEC | PU | 6/12/18/24
# | Milestone name | WP(s) | Due date | Means of verification (KPI)
1 | Samples allow experimental trials to start | WP1 | M2 | PVC samples received from early adopters from T2.1
2 | Industry specification and expected performance KPIs are captured | WP2 | M4 | ≥ 20 early adopters have contributed to 4 scoping sessions
3 | Downscaled designs of the dual LIBS-Raman spectroscopic fusion analyser | WP1
WP2 | M6 | Design review with early adopters to ensure system meets space, cost, functionality & performance requirements
4 | Complete initial machine learning models for spectral data fusion | WP1 | M10 | Capability to process & fuse LIBS-Raman spectral data, achieving ≥98% both accuracy & recall or alternatively Matthews Correlation Coefficient ≥0.97 in detecting presence of ≥0.1% w/w of lead contaminants & differentiate amount of phthalate plasticisers (DOP or DPHP)
5 | Inspection system prototype complete | WP2 | M10 | Functional prototype of the LIBS-Raman inspection system, integrating all core components (spectrometer, laser, etc).
6 | Inspection System integrated in sorting module | WP2 | M12 | Performance validation in lab conditions confirms KPIs and Approved Factory Acceptance Test confirm TRL5 is reached
7 | Market traction: industry/early adopter buy-in | WP3 | M12 | LOIs from ≥3 early adopters interested in post-project pilots; 1 cooperation LOI signed with OEM. Formal commitment or validation from ≥80% of our global network of distributors to include VISUM LRS in their sales portfolio.
8 | System successfully installed in a PVC recycling facility | WP4 | M14 | Setup tests & system verification confirm correct operation (results documented in Installation Verification Report).
9 | Industry trials provide critical real-world data for system validation and for informing optimisation work | WP4
WP5 | M18 | Data on performance metrics (e.g. sorting accuracy, uptime, material throughput) & key metrics (e.g. detection rates & processing times) compared vs lab results in ML5
10 | Site Acceptance Tests confirm TRL6 | WP5 | M21 | Industrial processing trials confirm KPIs from ML1
11 | System optimisation ensures readiness for scale-up and broader market use and actively demoed to early adopters. | WP5
MP6 | M24 | Document key modifications made to system to address any issues identified during industrial trials. Performance tests in lab and industrial settings will be repeated to verify improvements. ≥40 industry & stakeholders in demo days.
12 | Investor-ready Business Plan for securing financing for scale-up & market deployment. | WP6 | M24 | Presentation of BP to key stakeholders, incl. potential investors & strategic partners, followed by feedback sessions to refine any remaining details.
Description (level of (i) likelihood & (ii) severity: Low/Medium/High) | WP(s) | Proposed risk-mitigation measures
Difficulties or delays in accessing samples. Likelihood: L/Severity: H | WP1 | Letters of Intent already secured. We will ensure that access to samples is mobilised even in advance of project KO (taking advantage of the contact preparation period).
Technical performance issues in the LIBS-Raman inspection system. 
Likelihood: M. Severity: H | WP1 WP2 | Conduct extensive lab testing (WP1, WP2) to identify performance bottlenecks early, followed by iterative optimisations. Engage additional technical experts for troubleshooting and continuous monitoring to ensure performance meets operational requirements. Multirange Spectroscopy Platform and hybrid ensembling may identify alternative measurement technique(s)/combinations thereof.
Inability to access the PVC recycling facility as priorities have changed in the early adopter Likelihood: M; Sev: H | WP4 | We will arrange an alternative industrial validation site among the 20 early adopters mobilised in the cocreation process in T2.1. We already have 9 LOIs from industry early adopters, European Process Industry Association and Regional Development Agency.
Integration challenges during industry installation and trials. 
Likelihood: L. Severity: High | WP4 | Robust design concept (in T2.2). Conduct detailed pre-installation assessments (T2.1) & ensure technical teams are available on-site during installation to address potential integration issues quickly. Test system functionality extensively in controlled lab settings (T2.5) to minimise integration risks.
Assessing scale-up requirements and costs is challenging and is considered risky. Likelihood: Low/Medium. Sev.: High | WP5 | We will leverage insights from WP4 industry trials to identify potential unknowns & challenges. Early collaboration with industry experts will help uncover hidden costs and operational challenges, ensuring the scale-up roadmap (T5.2) is based on the best available data and realistic assumptions.
Delays in Certification and Regulatory Approvals. Likelihood: Med. Severity: Low | WP3 WP6 | Deemed low- it can continue in post-project industrialisation phase. Begin certification process early, engage with regulatory experts (UNE). Incorporate certification requirements into design phase (WP2).
Market Adoption Resistance
Likelihood: Medium, Severity: Medium | WP3 WP6 | Mitigate by engaging industry stakeholders early via co-creation activities (WP2) and securing early adopter commitment (WP3). Demonstrate ROI via pilot trials (WP3, T5.1) & case studies to build confidence among potential customers. Seek formal validation by a recognized (official) institution.
Lumpsum financing model proves challenging for project management and presents cashflow risks. 
Likelihood: Low, Severity: High | WP7 | Workplan designed around 2 iterative R&D phases, each with defined start/end dates, outputs & milestones. Results-based project management approach focussed on achieving specific outcomes & delivering tangible results. RBMP is suited for managing a Lump Sum project- focussed on continuous monitoring, progress evaluation, resource efficiency & reporting to ensure project meets its objectives.
WP1 | WP2 | WP3 | WP4 | WP5 | WP6 | WP7 | Total PMs/ Participant
1/IRIS | 27.5 | 75.5 | 22 | 21.5 | 41.0 | 27.5 | 34.5 | 249.5
Total Person Months (PMs) | 27.5 | 75.5 | 22 | 21.5 | 41.0 | 27.5 | 34.5 | 249-5
1 /IRIS | Cost (€) | Justification
Travel and subsistence | 37000 | €4k for trips in WP2 to visit early adopters. €4k for trips in WP3 for market prospection/ research/F2F meetings. €8k for trips in WP4 to industry validation site (and for optimisations in WP5). €4k for trips to for F2F to early adopters in WP6. €2k for trips to Project Review meetings in WP7. €15k for trips to dissemination events, tradeshows, exhibitions, etc.
Equipment
Other goods, works and services | 361,800 | Lab consumables in WP1 (20k); WP1: 2k for any repair/materials for Multirange spectroscopy experimental unit. Materials for building 2 prototype inspection systems + sorter module in WP2 (228k): Inspection system/unit (x2): Nd:YAG pulsed laser with frequency doubler: 30 k€; High resolution (0.1 nm) spectrometer for both Raman and LIBS spectra: 15 k€; Common hardware (structure, housing, power supply, dedicated (embedded) computer, electronic card for driving actuators and implementing synchronization...)-5k; Optics (for internally handling sequential excitation management: 10 k€ (components); Probes for collecting optical signals: 1 x Raman 1 x LIBS: 2 x 7 k€. Other components: 5 k€. By-pass conveyor and sorter (x2): Electronics for targeting: 3 k€; Artificial vision subsystem (fast camera, illumination and redouts electronics, off-the-shelf module): 7 k€; Fast actuator (driven by the electronics) for spotting the laser on the targets: 10 k€: Conveyor (inspection area) and sorter (in the same structure): 15 k€. Parts for optimisations/repairs in WP5 (15k); (Computing/Servers/Software packages (24K): 4k (WP1); 9.5k (WP2); 8.5k (WP4); 2k (WP7); Audit Cert: 4k (WP7); Shipping and insurance: 15K (WP1, WP2, WP4); Market Reports (8K) WP3. IP Lawyer WP3 (5K); Certification costs WP3 (5k); Hosting meetings/demos (8k) in WP2 & WP6; Tradeshows/Exhibition (space/stand): 4 @6k each (WP7); Communication materials and videos (€9.2k) in WP7.
Total | 400,800