3.1 Quality and motivation of the team:  IRIS, founded in Barcelona in 2007, is a leading European manufacturer and integrator of photonics and AI solutions for real-time monitoring and control of industrial processes. We specialise in NIR Spectroscopy, Hyperspectral Imaging, Raman, LIBS, and other techniques (e.g. UV, fluorescence) and Machine Vision integrating them with AI-driven software deep learning systems to deliver advanced analysis solutions, applied across diverse materials and in complex industrial scenarios, including food, plastics, pharmaceuticals, chemicals, and waste.

Mission: To bring Innovation to Industry by the creation and integration of high-end technologies and solutions.
Vision: To become a world leading manufacturer of photonics and AI solutions by dedicating our passion and talent to push the limits of technology. Our R&D Vision is to use our R&D+I capabilities and R&D projects to capitalise the knowledge, to create new products to the market and to develop new industrial applications, to keep our competitiveness up to date and open new markets.
Our team consists of 70 multidisciplinary experts from the scientific and technological fields required for Industry 4.0 solutions development: programmers, engineers (optical, mechatronic, electronic & process engineers), chemists, physicists, mathematicians, data scientists & technologists. We have an experienced Senior Management Team that leads an organisation structure consisting of Departments (Science; Engineering; Digital; Production; Sales & Marketing; Finance, HR and Admin) each with their own Departmental Manager. We are committed to quality and continuous improvement, and we are certified in ISO 9001:2008 and UNE-EN-ISO 166002: Management Systems R&D&I certified. Our company has two divisions: IRIS Commercial, delivering B2B solutions and services to industry (serving a growing client base of blue chips and mid-caps from the food processing, chemical, pharmaceutical, biobased and process industries); and, IRIS Innovation Lab that works in an Open Innovation context to build new knowledge, knowhow and IP to fuel our innovation pipeline so that we can offer cutting edge solutions to industry via our Commercial Division. We are the developers and manufacturers of the VisumTM range of fully certified CE mark non-destructive, accurate and real-time analytical devices: Visum NIR In-Line™- In-line NIR analyser; Visum Palm™-Handheld NIR analyser; Visum HSI™-Hyperspectral Imaging System; Visum Raman In-Line™-Raman analyser; Visum DeepSight™ - Machine Vision System.
Alongside our technical strengths, IRIS has built strong business and commercial capabilities to support our market-driven innovation strategy. Our team includes experts in business development, market analysis, finance, and investment planning. We have successfully secured and managed public and private funding (national and EU) and work closely with financial advisors and technology transfer experts to develop robust business models for our high-tech products. Our commercial leadership brings experience in enterprise sales, B2B pricing (hardware, services, SaaS), and go-to-market strategy, driving traction through a global network of 19 distributors in 27 countries (and future OEM partnerships). We are proud to have secured the trust of important clients, among them AstraZeneca, Sanofi, Almirall, P&G, LyondellBasell, Europastry, Bimbo, Sonae, General Mills, Reig Jofre, Ecoiberia, etc. In this project, we will develop an investment-ready business plan, including cost-benefit analysis, ROI projections & risk assessment. IRIS has worked with Horizon Results Booster & received commercialisation support from Accio & ICEX and will continue leveraging external expertise to strengthen our capital readiness.