2.3   Investment readiness

Proposed measures to become investment ready and plans to commercialise the project outcomes: To become investment-ready and commercialise our project outcomes, we will implement a comprehensive strategy focused on business validation showing first traction (already Deceuninck, Veolia, PreZero, INEOS, Vynova are flagship references). Over the course of the project, we will secure engagement and traction with an additional 20 early adopters for cocreation, and we will secure LOIs from ≥3 early adopters interested in post-project pilots, sign 1 cooperation agreement with an OEM (e.g. PICVISA), and secure formal commitment or validation from ≥80% of our global network of distributors to include the VISUM LRS in their sales portfolio. In terms of our market positioning as a business, we already have a client base for other products in the VisumTM range, and we have been consolidating recognition and positioning with this brand in the deep tech space), and IP management (whereby IP will be safeguarded working with our IP legal experts ClarkeModet) to secure IPRs (patent, utility model, trademark) to protect our innovation and create licensing opportunities. We will develop a robust business and financing plan that includes a detailed market feasibility study, cost-benefit analysis, and financial projections to demonstrate the project’s commercial potential. Simultaneously, we will also validate and refine our Go-to-Market (GTM) strategy with the invaluable assistance of our international distribution network of channel partners.
Go-to-market pathway/strategy:
Our GTM strategy is to focus our initial market segment (market entry strategy) on plastics recycling, an industry worth >€9.1 billion in Europe, with 13.2 million tonnes of installed capacity across ⁓850 recycling facilities (source: Plastics Recyclers Europe). However, due to the impacts of cheap imported plastics, tough legislation and regulation of EU recycled plastics, high energy costs, among others, as well as by the end of 2025 the region will have lost recycling plants, amounting to a staggering 1 million tonnes of recycling capacity. The Plastics Recyclers Europe points to enhanced monitoring systems as being urgently needed.  VISUM LRS™ directly addresses this critical gap by enabling real-time, in-line detection of restricted substances and legacy additives, unlocking new value from difficult-to-recycle streams and helping recyclers meet quality standards more efficiently and cost-effectively. Our first use case in the PVC recycling segment is both strategic and pragmatic- strategic due to the strict regulations on lead content and other LS, and pragmatic because it was the target segment of the REMADYL project, through which we built relationships with lighthouse early adopters, including Deceuninck, Veolia, Ineos and PreZero. We also have received strong interest from a sorter OEM (PICVISA), enabling potential OEM partnerships for market scale-up.
By the end of the EIC Transition project, we expect to have brought the LIBS-Raman dual spectroscopy fusion system to TRL6. Full industrial deployment will require further steps in production scaling, integration testing, validation, and supply chain set up. Based on our market deployment experience, expected time-to-market (TTM) is 24-36 months post-project. This will also involve obtaining the necessary certifications for commercialisation, initially in the EU market (CE Mark, laser safety: DIRECTIVE 2006/25/EC, among others). We will engage early with regulatory bodies & experts (e.g. Asociación Española de Normalización (UNE), Deloitte for AI Act compliance) to fast-track certifications for building confidence and reducing customer adoption barriers.
In terms of Target Market Segmentation, as was seen from Table 1, within the waste recycling, there are 5 priority segments, and we will start with plastics recycling (sorting and identification), whereby in the PVC use case compliance with lead and other LS restrictions is critical. We will quickly expand to the adjacent and priority EU segments E-waste recycling and Battery recycling, and then to metals recycling & alloy sorting, and glass & construction waste streams. Our application pipeline will be planned for entry into other industrial applications in mining (which is a ‘spot’ implementation), pharmaceutical, food processing, and environmental monitoring sectors (in which the need for real-time hazardous material detection is growing).
The core Value Proposition will be refined highlighting the innovative dual spectroscopic fusion analyser's combination of elemental (LIBS) and molecular (Raman) analysis in one unit, providing real-time and accurate chemical composition analysis for complex and compliance critical applications (e.g. PVC recycling).
We will form early adopter partnerships with leading waste recycling companies (LOIs in place with Deceuninck, Veolia, PreZero + INEOS & Vynova as leading PVC producers), particularly those already struggling to meet new regulatory standards, as well as industry associations (e.g. SPIRE- LOI). The goal will be to sign ≥3 pilots or paid agreements (early-access pricing) for the post-project to establish market credibility and generate case studies showcasing the system’s effectiveness.
For our distribution and sales strategy, we will use a direct sales approach for early customers in the plastics recycling  industry, where the system’s technical benefits can be demonstrated effectively leveraging the PVC use case. Traction and experience with first clients will allow us to activate our global distribution network (covering 27 countries across Europe, Asia, Latin America, North Africa), who can scalably open international markets, brining local expertise and capacitated to offer robust technical support. In parallel, we will sign license agreements with OEMs (LOI already secured from PICVISA), who will integrate our inspection system in their sorters (new or retrofit opportunities). Both direct sales and our Channels will be supported by a digital marketing strategy, underpinned by paid campaigns and a professional content strategy for our website and social media channels to attract early adopters (lead generation). IRIS website will be continually optimised with SEO/SEM techniques to increase visibility and traction.
The business model is based on the provision of a turnkey implementations (one off revenue), in addition to annual service/maintenance agreements. A service-based model could also be explored, whereby the LIBS-Raman system is leased along with maintenance, technical support, and software updates. Our pricing strategy is based on cost + margin, with the annual maintenance service representing ⁓5% of the contract value (and is ARR). Financing options like leasing or pay-per-use models could be explored (for companies hesitant about upfront capital expenditure). Table 5 presents a 5-year business plan based on our GTM strategy (focussing first on PVC recycler, wider plastics recyclers and extending to adjacent segments within the online waste recycling market). This business plan will be further studied and updated in in WP3 & WP5. #§IMP-ACT-IA§#

3. Quality and efficiency of the implementation #@QUA-LIT-QL@# #@CON-SOR-CS@# #@PRJ-MGT-PM@#