2.2 Economic and/or societal benefits

Scale up potential to gain and create new European or global markets: Thanks to the market research and business planning work performed in conjunction with the Horizon Results Booster in the REMADYL H2020 project, we verified significant market potential in the PVC recycling market, which will be further strengthened by our ability to measure the concentrations of both lead plasticiser (RS) and stabiliser (LIBS) legacy additives through a hybrid approach. The global PVC recycling market was valued at approximately USD 3.3 billion in 2023 and is expected to grow to USD 4.9 billion by 2028, at a CAGR of 8.0%. This growth is driven by increasing regulatory pressures and demand for sustainable materials across industries like construction and packaging​ (MarketsandMarkets, GlobeNewswire). Within this global market, Europe represents a significant portion of PVC recycling efforts due to the region's strict environmental regulations and focus on sustainability. The EU, being at the forefront of environmental regulation, has major recycling markets for PVC, especially in Germany, France, and the UK, where companies like Deceuninck, Veolia, Vynova, INEOS & PreZero (LOIs) are leading players ​(MarketsandMarkets). The European PVC market demonstrates significant scale valued at USD 7.42 billion in 2023 and estimated to reach USD 9.75 billion by 2031 (Verified Market Research). In terms of volume, Europe’s PVC demand reached 6.08 MMT in 2024, with projections of 8.74 MMT by 2034 (Expert Market Research). Recycling is a critical component, with Europe’s total installed plastics recycling capacity at 13.2 million tonnes in 2023, with over 1.1 MMT dedicated to PVC alone.
In relation to the ability to gain or create new European or global markets, Visum LRS is positioned as a next-generation PAT for real-time chemical monitoring in industrial environments. It represents a category-defining innovation, whereby the optical fusion of LIBS and Raman make it possible to separately acquire information from two contiguous and interrelated holistic levels (atomic and molecular respectively), i.e. ability to govern all chemical behaviour in nature, in a unique, compact and affordable device. From an industrial implementation perspective, we will design two different implementation strategies to be able to cover the majority of industrial processing scenarios: static spot (for single and non-conveyed samples), and dynamic spot (for moving samples). Our modular sorting subsystem will also be engineered for adaptability and high-throughput compatibility, enabling easy retrofit to existing processing lines or integration into OEM designs. As such, from a technological and technical industrial implementation level, we open the ability to cost-effectively and reliably service complex monitoring challenges in additional plastics identification and sorting applications (beyond PVC recycling), in other online waste recycling applications (Table 1), as well as process monitoring and inspection in mining, pharmaceuticals, biotechnology, environmental monitoring, health, defence among others. From a market reach perspective, IRIS has its inhouse direct sales and out bound marketing team, and customer support. For growth we have has a credible international growth strategy through our international distribution network (currently with a coverage in 27 countries in Europe, Latin America, Asia, N. Africa). For strategic acceleration, we will pursue partnerships with OEMS (e.g. PICVISA), whose equipment integration capabilities offer a scalable pathway to rapidly reach large industrial clients. These OEM agreements form the basis of a highly repeatable, capital-efficient GTM strategy for growth across verticals.
Positive impacts for Europe: Taking our market entry application of plastics recycling, the Plastics Recyclers Europe outlines the urgent need to ‘enhance monitoring systems to ensure compliance with recycled content targets and that recycled plastics meet the high standards required for critical applications’. The Visum LRS is a technology enabler for monitoring and compliance with tougher EU legislative requirements. In the target PVC recycling use case, the innovative dual spectroscopic fusion analyser for on-line waste recycling will enable recyclers to remove harmful legacy additives from PVC recycling streams securing the competitiveness and viability of the value chain, and protecting human health and the environment. PVC waste containing legacy lead plasticisers and stabilisers can be redirected to alternatives processing (e.g. extraction of the lead, etc.). Our technology could also be used for screening the importation of PVC products to Europe to prevent non-compliant products entering the EU market, for EU citizen protection. This is a vital requirement according to the Plastic Recyclers Europe, whereby the implementation of rigorous controls of compliance and quality requires equal enforcement applied to both domestic and imported goods22. As such the Visum LRS could also be used by non-EU producers to quantify the composition of the PVC-based products to evidence compliance with EU market requirements, opening a global market. This strengthens both market surveillance and Europe’s capacity for enforcement of REACH and RoHS regulations, supporting health and safety objectives. Considering the impacts for resource efficiency, circularity and contributions to the EU’s Green Deal of ensuring safe and viable PVC recycling, the following business case from Deceuninck is compelling: PVC windows have a lifespan of 35 years and that they can be processed at least 8 times without any impact on performance, resulting in a total lifespan of ≥300 years. PVC recycling significantly reduces greenhouse gas emissions and conserves resources compared to virgin PVC production, with economic benefits including job creation and reduced raw material costs.
In terms of European jobs, the plastics recycling industry employs over 30,000 people in Europe (source: Plastics Recyclers Europe). The PVC industry (covering resin producers, converters, and machinery manufacturers) directly & indirectly supports >over 530,000 jobs across the value chain. By enabling compliance and enhancing the competitiveness of EU-based recyclers & OEMs, VISUM LRS will help safeguard existing employment & the creation of new jobs through scaling production, integration, maintenance, and services. Full commercialisation of VISUM LRS in the PVC sector alone could support ⁓500 new high-skilled & technical jobs across the value chain (manufacturing, installation, service, and data-driven monitoring).
Moreover, VISUM LRS contributes to EU strategic autonomy by reducing dependence on non-EU sensor & PAT technologies, enabling internal compliance with EU regulations through ‘Made in Europe’ technology and innovation (whereby we are at all times committed to prioritising EU component suppliers for EU sovereign strategy support). The impacts of our technology for strengthening EU plastics recycling value chains, for retaining critical IP within Europe, and for reinforces the EU photonics and AI ecosystem will all contribute to industrial competitiveness and resilience.