1.2 Objectives

Describe the objectives both for technology development and for business validation & development of the project.
We have formulated a series of SMART (Specific, Measurable, Attainable, Relevant and Timebound) technology development and business validation and development objectives that will be fulfilled during the 24-month EIC Transition project. They are presented in Table 2, along with associated key performance indicators (KPIs) will be used for tracking progress.
Table 2- S.M.A.R.T. project objectives for technology development and business validation and development
Objective 1: To implement a cocreation approach with industry and standards/regulatory experts to accompany and systematically inform the technology development and business validation/development activities (to assist the Go-to-Market segmentation strategy) for industry and market success. KPIs: Experts from ≥ 20 industrial companies, OEMs, and stakeholders will participate in 4 scoping sessions by M6, not only from the application focus of this development, i.e. PVC and wider waste recycling, whereby we currently have Letters of Intent (LOIs) from Deceuninck, INEOS, Vynova, Veolia, PreZero & PICVISA. We also will have pathways to other industrial applications in the European process industries (A.SPIRE engaged with LOI, representing 170 industrial players & stakeholders from cement, ceramics, chemicals, engineering, minerals and ores, non-ferrous metals, pulp and paper, refining, steel & water sectors). A standards body (UNE from Spain is engaged). 1 industry partner will test and validate the VISUM LRS dual spectroscopic fusion analyser system in their PVC recycling facilities and provide feedback to guide optimisation and upscaling work (Deceuninck in their facility in Belgium); ≥ 40 industry and stakeholders (with assistance from ACCIO- Regional Development Agency of Catalonia- engaged with a LOI) will participate in demo days or in 1-to-1 presentations of the prototype demo unit. NTUA are also engaged with a LOI for future applications in mining & metallurgy.
Objective 2: To perform laboratory experiments with PVC samples using hardware compatible Multirange Spectroscopic testbed that employs Machine Learning hybrid ensemble modelling to effectively implement the spectral data fusion. The most suitable optical fusion of spectroscopic techniques and their spectral sequence will be identified. Data generated during the experiments will effectively implement the spectral data fusion to development machine learning models that enhance the system’s predictive capabilities and to meet the performance KPIs defined by industry, market and regulatory requirements: ≥ 98% both accuracy and recall or alternatively Matthews Correlation Coefficient ≥ 0.97  in detecting the presence of 0.1% w/w and above of lead contaminants (e.g. B28 or TBLS lead stabilisers) and to differentiate the amount of phthalate plasticisers (DOP or DPHP) present in PVC samples. 1 publication of the results in an Open Access Journal. Technology Readiness Level: TRL4.
Objective 3: To use the results of the experimental tests to inform the optimal downscaled designs of the dual spectroscopic LIBS-RS fusion analyser (along with any other techniques that may reveal themselves thanks to the multirange opportunity offered by the multirange spectroscopy testbed), and to build the device leveraging hardware compatibility. An interoperable data management platform will be developed for collecting and processing the multivariate data from the inspection device, and this data will be processed by the ML models for effectively implementing the data fusion in hybrid ensembling. The inspection device will be integrated in a prototype mechanical convey sorter, laboratory tests under controlled conditions simulation industrial environments using real production samples provided by our early adopters will confirm the achievement of the operational and economic KPIs defined by industry: Factory Acceptance Tests (FAT) confirm the inspection system is compatible with the typical industrial processor throughputs, i.e., conveyor belts running at 30 m/min; Affordability (market cost: <€125k). TRL4-5.
Objective 4: To install the dual spectroscopic LIBS-RS fusion device and modular sorting system in an industrial PVC recycling facility, ensuring feasibility of implementation in a dynamic spot approach based on multipoint probing with a useful spatial resolution for industrial-grade challenges. Production trials will be performed to validate and demonstrate system accuracy, speed, and operational stability through exhaustive trials and feedback loops from industrial stakeholders. KPIs: Successful installation of the system in an industrial PVC recycling conveyor by M14, followed by processing trials demonstrating ≥ 90% both accuracy and recall or alternatively Matthews Correlation Coefficient ≥ 0.95 in detecting lead contaminants and detection capacity at convey belt speeds by M21. Reliability: Achieve >95% uptime during production trials pilot deployments. Site Acceptance Tests (SAT) and a validation report generated by M20, will capture system performance and operational feedback from the industry trials, which will be benchmarked against the pre-defined KPIs and will inform optimisations. Technology Readiness Level: TRL5-6.
Objective 5: To optimise the prototype based on feedback from industry trials and develop a detailed roadmap for scaling the technology from TRL7 to TRL9, ensuring alignment with industrial-scale operational requirements and economic feasibility. KPIs: Completion of system optimisations based on trial feedback by M22, with demonstrated improvements in lead detection accuracy, processing speed, and operational efficiency. Development of a comprehensive scale-up and implementation roadmap (based on two implementation formats ‘dynamic spot’ for conveyor-based industrial applications and ‘static spot’ for non-conveyed samples to be inspected in an at-line setup), including costing, production, and deployment strategies, with input from the early adopters, by M24. Technology Readiness Level: Towards 6.
Objective 6: To design a Go-to-Market strategy, including the development of a multi-tier business model that is verified with early adopters, our distribution network, and OEMs, and to ensure the necessary certifications for regulatory compliance are identified and fulfilled to pave the way for successful market entry. KPIs: Letters of Intent from 3 early adopters interested in post-project adoption (signed by M20); 80% of our global network of distributors have expressed interest in including the Visum LRS in their sales portfolios; 1 cooperation LOI signed with an OEM. Obtain necessary certifications (e.g., CE marking) (by M24). Business Validation & Development Objective.
Objective 7: To develop a comprehensive business and financing plan to accelerate the post-project scale-up and commercialization of the dual spectroscopic fusion analyser. This plan will include a market feasibility study, market segmentation (to verify market entry application and to identify the roadmap of follow-on applications in conveyor and non-conveyor deployments), cost-benefit analysis, assessment of financial viability, market demand, regulatory costs, and projected returns on investment. An intellectual property (IP) strategy will also be included to protect innovations and strengthen market competitiveness. KPI: Completion of an investment-ready business and financing plan with integrated market feasibility, cost-benefit analysis, and IP strategy by M24 that includes a quantified financial model (CAPEX, OPEX, ROI, breakeven) aligned with realistic market uptake scenarios, is validated through external feedback (incl. ≥2 formal review sessions with investors, early adopters, or business support networks (e.g., EEN or relevant VCs). Business Validation and Development Objective.
The project objectives are effectively designed to facilitate the development and validation of the dual LIBS-Raman spectroscopy analyser in real-world application environments: By engaging industry and regulatory experts from the outset in a cocreation approach, will ensure the technology is developed in alignment with market needs and compliance requirements. Through comprehensive laboratory experiments and testing, followed by integration into real industrial settings, the project’s phased approach guarantees that the system’s performance is validated in both controlled and operational environments. We will install the developed prototype in Deceuninck’s PVC recycling plant in Diksmuide, Belgium (signed LOI), which is one of the world’s most advanced PVC recycling facilities, with a capacity of 40,000 tonnes for rigid PVC (making it the largest of its kind in the Benelux). Building on our collaboration with Deceuninck in the REMADYL project, in which we were both consortium partners and whereby we worked with the team at the Diksmuide plant to identify potential optimal locations for the integration of the sorting system, in scoping sessions at the start of the EIC Transition project, we will prepare for seamless validation of the dual spectroscopic fusion analyser-driven sorting system in their facilities. Feedback from these industrial trials will inform optimisation work and subsequent development roadmap to align the technology with industrial-scale requirements, mitigating scalability risks.
How the specific operational objectives address the challenges and unknown to bring the innovation to the public: The operational objectives have been defined based on our experience to date in scaling up and bringing to market fully certified CE mark (and ATEX compliance) real-time spectroscopy and Machine Vision (MV) analytical devices: Visum NIR In-Line™ - In-line NIR analyser; Visum Palm™ - Handheld NIR analyser; Visum HSI™- Hyperspectral Imaging System; Visum Raman In-Line™ - Raman analyser; Visum DeepSight™-MV System. Cocreation with a sufficient representation of industry applications and segments: waste recycling industry (plastics and PVC recycling), process industries (e.g. mining, chemical, food processing, bio-based industries, among others), and consultation with additional stakeholders, such as standards bodies, economic development agencies, industry association, among others, is a proven approach that has demonstrated itself to be successful in our developments to date. This is a proactive strategy for identifying 'unknowns' (so that hidden challenges related to deployment, scalability, and market needs can be uncovered early). This is very powerful in combination with a ‘top down’ methodology to tackling application development (enabled by our multirange spectroscopy testbed and hybrid ensembling modelling that is ideally suited to effectively delivering technological solutions to complex scenarios and ‘unknowns’. This, combined with an iterative approach to the development, allows us the adaptability to take account of learnings and findings to ensure that the product is well-prepared for real-world applications. By integrating business validation, certifications, and market analysis into the objectives, the project also tackles potential regulatory and commercial barriers, ensuring that the innovation is ready for public market entry, fully compliant, and economically viable for industry adoption.
Methodology #@CON-MET-CM@# #@COM-PLE-CP@#
Approach and methodology
Spectroscopic Benchmarking using a multirange Spectroscopic testbed (Visum ‘Fusion’): IRIS is an advanced engineering company specialising in the manufacture and integration of photonics-based, real-time process monitoring solutions. We have developed a competitive edge by staying technology-agnostic. As opposed to spectroscopy analyser vendors, our approach to solving complex Industry 4.0 monitoring challenges focuses on continually investigating and applying the most suitable techniques, driven by industrial requirements and application constraints as opposed to aligning with any single technique.
Continually challenged with resolving industrial problems, we have been consistently pushing the boundaries of photonics- particularly spectroscopy- from an engineering (hardware) and scientific (physics) standpoint. This has culminated in the recent creation and development of a disruptive Multirange Spectroscopic testbed (called the Visum ‘Fusion’) that combines the principles of advanced spectroscopic (SWIR, NIR, MWIR, VIS, Raman, LIBS, Fluorescence, HSI) and MV techniques in a single platform. The techniques are seamlessly activated through shared spectrometers (Raman uses a VIS or a NIR spectrometer; LIBS and fluorescence use VIS), as well as common illumination systems (VIS, NIR and SWIR can all use a common halogen lamp, while lasers are required for LIBS and Raman), power supplies, software drivers and -in some cases- optical probes. This proprietary experimental unit works in combination with groundbreaking hybrid-ensemble modelling (discussed below) for implementing spectral data spectral data fusion to identify the most suitable technique combination thereof based on the parameters to be measured for each application. It serves as a unique experimental unit for the effective benchmarking of the distinct physics of a comprehensive range of spectroscopic and MV techniques. It is a powerful tool for tackling highly complex monitoring requirements & for easily exploring ‘unknowns’, thanks to its ubiquitous ability to ‘activate’ its comprehensive array of measurement techniques, the most effective combination of which is automatically orchestrated with the hybrid ensembling for implementing the correct spectral data fusion. In this way, we allow the solution ‘evolve’ to address the monitoring requirements in a top-down methodology, as opposed to experimenting with ‘predefined’ techniques, whereby we could miss the opportunity of addressing the ‘unknowns’. So, in this case, while the primary focus is on the LIBS-Raman fusion, the testbed will activate other techniques as required, especially in view both of the complexity of ‘old’ PVC waste processing and the high number of toxic additives used in plastics in low concentrations, requiring sensitive techniques for real-time detection in industrial recycling.
Using the novel Hybrid Ensemble paradigm for performing seamless data fusion, to obtain dramatic improvements in precision, accuracy, and limit of detection: In machine learning (ML), "ensembling" means combining -according to certain predefined procedure- a plurality of different algorithms to be applied on a common raw dataset in order to take advantage of the particular capabilities of each algorithm for eventually generating a weighted output that takes into account the contribution from each one. Our hybrid ensembling approach extends this concept to the source of empirical data, i.e., different physics and technologies that contribute in different ways and extents to unveil the required information. Consequently, it entails widening the ensembling scope beyond the software possibilities by also involving the hardware that provides the raw data. In the same way that traditional ensembling improves the model capabilities by including several approaches in a common corpus, hybrid ensembling also includes different sources of multivariate data in an extended combination of algorithms and data types.
There are several advantages associated to the hybrid ensembling concept, namely, increased data redundancy that renders more robust predictive models, higher multidimensional data spaces albeit lower collinearity risk because each technology explores different physical interactions, variables and technologies selection capabilities and improved model robustness and accuracy. Consequently, the ‘Fusion’ test bed will be used for developing the hybrid ensembling models by including both LIBS and Raman probes as well as other technologies according to a detailed design of experiments. Such a plan will comprehend the most relevant cases, as well as sufficient variety of ranges and circumstances to emulate the expected industrial conditions and needs. In terms of technological maturity, we have successfully implemented hybrid ensembling for optical data fusion in other applications, namely MERLIN and RECLAIM, whereby we have developed multi-model architectures that combined inputs from different sensors (spectroscopic and non-spectroscopic) to achieve reliable classification in complex material characterisation applications, specifically in waste plastic sorting, achieving, e.g. ≥94% accuracy classifying PET (polyethylene terephthalate), PP (polypropylene), PE (polyethylene), PS (polystyrene), PAPER-based, and non-ferrous METAL-based waste objects, using labelled laboratory datasets and structured multivariate cascade modelling (TRL3-4). We will apply this in the VISUM LRS case, and we will adapt and advance to TRL5-6, whereby models will be refined using new data from the VISUM Fusion testbed, retrained on industrial datasets from prototype integration, and optimised via online learning and feedback loops during real-world trials. This will ensure adaptation to process variability, speed, and material diversity. All models will be version-controlled, documented, and validated through cross-validation, statistical tests (e.g. Fisher-Pitman), and benchmarking, and their development will be aligned with the EC’s AI Act and Trustworthy AI principles (as discussed later in this section), ensuring robustness, traceability, and safe deployment in dynamic industrial environments.
Downscaling concept- from the Fusion Testbed to a case-wise optimum set-up: The design and engineering of a prototype of the dual spectroscopic fusion analyser for on-line waste recycling will use a ‘downscaling’ process (fig.2) that is informed by the experimental work performed with the Multirange Spectroscopic testbed in conjunction with hybrid ensembling for obtaining information in relation to: the combination of spectroscopic techniques (LIBS, Raman and any other), the spectroscopic sequencing, as well as the ML Hybrid Ensembling models for implementing the spectral data fusion (leveraging the based on the PVC recycling use case). This downscaling process (i.e. translating the testbed to a case-wise optimum set-up) benefits from the common hardware compatibilities (i.e. the ‘Fusion Core’) of the testbed (fig. 2), i.e. ‘compatible-by-design’. To this end the dual spectroscopic fusion analyser will share common hardware, with specific settings tailored to each case: frequency-doubled Nd:YAG pulsed laser (that emits at 532 nm) can be shared by setting it at 2 two different pulse energy levels (lower for exciting Raman scattering and higher for generating the emitting plasma required for LIBS); the high spectral resolution spectrometer suitable for acquiring LIBS spectra is also compatible for acquiring Raman spectra as both phenomena take place in the VIS spectral range. In addition, common optical probes, power supply, trigger, and computing system can all be shared for cost reductions and compactness. The novel sequential spectral fusion approach—using both techniques in tandem, in two successive steps with minimal lag—can generate richer spectral data, which is ideal for leveraging data fusion techniques, such as the disruptive ML Hybrid Ensembling procedure for increasing the performance of the inspection system.
Interoperable Digital System for Industry 4.0 deployments: The multivariate data from the final downscaled dual spectroscopic fusion analyser (and from any other relevant data source as discussed below), will be collected in a Data Management Platform (which will be adapted from the IRIS ‘Scadalytics’ software), consisting of the following layers: ■ Communication Interfaces and APIs layer for data integration and interoperability with the dual spectroscopic fusion analyser, and for receiving data from SCADA/ERP, PLC, other their party analysers & Industrial IoT devices; ■ Data processing layer performs data conditioning prior to its use by the data fusion layer. ■ Data fusion layer employs hybrid-ensemble modelling for implementing data fusion (ensuring a common architecture in relation to the data processing tools, whereby the hybrid-ensemble modelling has different roles in the application R&D and implementation road map).The most straightforward approach for implementing data fusion through hybrid ensembling involves identifying optimal pairings or tuples of instruments and machine learning methods within a specific ensemble architecture, in order to achieve both the most robust and accurate predictive algorithm. An instant evident advantage is a reduction in the number of observations (samples) required for developing models that are not prone to undergo overfitting. In fact, the lack of sufficient numbers of different samples (as many as required for building useful models) is the most frequent barrier to the wide use of ML-based spectroscopic analysers. The hybrid ensembling concept addresses the limitation of two extreme approaches: on the one hand, modelling the merged data by means of just one weakly optimal algorithm and, on the other hand, applying the machine learning ensemble approach to a dataset that involves limited information provided by just one type of spectroscopic analyser. The outputs from this layer can be either sent directly to the Scada, can be interfaced through a self-contained User Interface (providing information for improved decision making, sending alerts to operators, as well as using data historian about the process for improved process understanding, optimisation, predictions, & anomaly detection), or can be sent up to an upper layer of intelligence for use by predictive models.
The collection and processing of multivariate data from the LIBS-Raman dual spectroscopic fusion analyser in an interoperable data management platform that can also fuse this data with other available univariate sensors from the processing line has the potential to move industrial processes, such as complex recycling, towards process automation through multivariate process control (MVPC), as well as ‘soft-sensors’ trained on historic process data.
Industry cocreation and participation in the R&D process and the market validation process: Our application-oriented R&D approach will be driven by a cocreation process involving early adopters and stakeholders through 4 scoping sessions in the first 4 four months. These will engage ≥20 organisations from diverse industrial segments to gather input on system design, industrial requirements and KPIs, which will feed into iterative development and market segmentation. This will shape our Go-to-Market (GTM) strategy, targeting plastics recyclers and a first PVC recycling use case, with clear pathways for follow-on markets. Participants will also define the performance, operational and business KPIs, which will be validated during industrial trials. As such, in the second project phase, the VISUM LRS prototype will be installed and tested at Deceuninck’s large-scale PVC recycling facility in Diksmuide, Belgium (fig. 3). Thanks to the at-line work performed with them during REMADYL, Deceuninck identified suitable integration spots in their existing recycling facility for piloting the system, which would allow them to effectively sort more complex input streams and separate the material steams into fractions in compliance with legislation. They have subsequently signed a LOI to pilot the VISUM LRS prototype in their facilities during this EIC Transition project Trials will measure sorting performance against the defined KPIs, enabling impact assessment and system optimisation. These results will support the creation of Application Notes and Business Case Studies (that can be appropriately anonymised to not reveal any sensitive information).
Crucially, the cocreation process (scoping sessions, industrial testing and validation process, and the demonstration of the innovation to early adopters) will guide and validate our scale-up roadmap for two implementation modes: ‘dynamic spot’ for conveyor-based industrial applications and ‘static spot’ for at-line inspection. This dual mode enhances versatility and wides market reach, with costing, production and deployment strategies informed directly by early adopters.
Technical robustness of our AI-based system and techniques: The machine learning components of our system will be developed in full compliance with the EC’s AI Act and the High-Level Expert Group's guidelines on Trustworthy AI, which define key requirements around transparency, accountability, human oversight, robustness and data governance. In this context, the AI system will be “trustworthy-by-design” in two ways: 1) Quantitative chemical validation. As the core of the system is an optical chemical analyser, performance can be objectively/ quantitatively validated using traceable physical standards or application-specific benchmarks. Detection accuracy will be benchmarked against known concentrations of lead and phthalates in PVC samples, with standardised ground truth references used to evaluate and verify model predictions. 2) Robust ML methodology: We will use hybrid ensemble models that fuse LIBS and Raman data to improve generalisation and reduce overfitting risk. To ensure scientific rigour, model performance and reliability will be assessed through cross-validation and statistical significance tests such as Fisher-Pitman randomisation test. These approaches will allow us to evaluate the likelihood that that high performance is due to model quality rather than random variation in data. To ensure security, auditability, and transparency, all training data, model parameters, and evaluation results will be version-controlled and traceable. Human-in-the-loop mechanisms will be maintained throughout the development and deployment phases to guarantee interpretability and user control.
How the project methodology complies with the ‘do no significant harm’ (DHSH) principle: Our project activities will not cause any significant harm to any of the 6 environmental objectives defined in  Regulation (EU) 2020/852: 1) Climate change mitigation; 2) Climate change adaptation; 3) Sustainable use and protection of water and marine resources; 4) Transition to a circular economy; 5) Pollution prevention and control; 6) Protection and restoration of biodiversity and ecosystems. From a technology engineering perspective, the system design and operation of the Visum LRS inspection system capitalises on common hardware, which will contribute to resource efficiency. Moreover, ultimate solution is primarily based on mature technologies (e.g. lasers, spectrometers, electronics) with low resource demands, long operational lifespan & low energy consumption, ensuring minimal environmental impact relative to the benefits delivered. Regarding waste recycling and our first PVC use case, the Visum LRS will prevent non-complaint PVC entering the market. This is critical, as the current consensus in the scientific community is that there is no safe level of exposure to lead (Pb), and particularly so for young children,, whereby cumulative childhood exposure can result in damage to the brain and nervous system, slowed growth, anaemia, hearing loss, and behavioural and learning problems. In adults, exposure can increase blood pressure and incidence of hypertension, decrease kidney function and reduce fertility. The device will also be an enabler for complaint PVC recycling (avoiding incineration and landfill routes) to further enhance the circularity of the PVC industry, reducing environmental impact. According to Deceuninck, recycling PVC leads to 90% less energy consumption that producing virgin raw material.
Gender dimension: We will adopt a ‘gendered innovation’ approach (Subtask 7.2.3) to integrate sex, gender, and intersectional analysis into our research, adding dimensions that might otherwise be overlooked. We will ensure equitable representation of female stakeholders and end-users in co-design and co-creation, from requirement definition to industrial trials and system assessment. Dissemination and Exploitation outputs will use gender-inclusive language and imagery, reflecting the roles and interests of both men and women, e.g. policies such as LS restrictions in PVC recycling address health risks that disproportionately affect women and children, and substances like DEHP is especially harmful to boys exposed prenatally. By linking innovation with inclusivity, and promoting female participation in technical, research & leadership roles positions, the project will contribute to both sustainability and gender equality in industrial innovation.
b. Open science practices: We will implement open science practices (i.e. an approach based on open cooperative work and systematic sharing of knowledge and tools as early and widely as possible in the process), as follows:
■ Early and open sharing of research: Publications will be made in open access journals, and we will ensure early sharing of publications (pre-prints) to satisfy open access requirements and to enable a faster way of sharing knowledge via deposit in repositories. Participation in open peer-review will also be considered.
■ Open access to research data and other related research outputs will be promoted following the principle 'as open as possible, as closed as necessary' and operated in parallel with a robust strategy for ensuring commercial exploitation, protection of personal data or confidentiality/security are not jeopardised.
■ Research output management: use of lab books and effective documentation procedures (according to our ISO 9001:2008 & UNE-EN-ISO 166002: Management Systems R&D&I procedures) of research results.
■ Measures to ensure reproducibility of research outputs: Adherence to mandatory technical standards to ensure that scientific information, publications, data & other project outputs, and the metadata about them, is available for long-term re-use, involving the use of persistent and unique identifiers, of certified repositories compliant to the standards of the European Open Science Cloud and FAIR (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, Reusable) principles.
■ Involving end users in the cocreation process: We will engage with industry early-adopters & decision makers in a participatory approach and also showcase the technology to as many industry stakeholders as possible in the latter stages of the project, via exhibitions, onsite demos, application notes, business use cases. Video clips will also target the general public.
c. Research data management and management of other research outputs: Table 3 provides an overview of how data/research outputs will be managed in line with FAIR principles. A full Data Management Plan (DMP) will be ready by M6 as D7.1 (updated as project implementation progresses and when significant changes occur).
Table 3- Summary of data management and management of other research outputs
#§PRJ-OBJ-PO§# #§REL-EVA-RE§# #@CON-MET-CM@# #@COM-PLE-CP@#

2.   Impact #@IMP-ACT-IA@#