2.1 Credibility of the impacts

How the activities proposed support the development of a business model and the product features: Our R&D methodology is application focussed, whereby we will develop the Visum LSR focussing on the PVC recycling application, which was the subject of the predecessor H2020 REMADYL project. We were very fortunate in view of the commercial potential of our innovation to have been selected by the Horizon Results Booster programme, which provided us with expert advice and mentorship in the development of an initial Business Plan for the LIBS PVC sorting system. We will continue this work in the EIC Transition project, whereby over two distinct project phases we have planned activities for analysing market potential and performing market segmentation (with the assistance of our 19 global distributors), ensuring regulatory compliance in a ‘by design’ approach (cooperation with UNE), continually monitoring the competition and technology landscape in parallel with FTO analysis and the implementation of an IP strategy to secure IP assets to protect and strengthen our commercial opportunity. All of these activities will shape an up-to-date business model design (underpinned by a strong Value Proposition) process and investor-ready business planning exercise. Tied into this process will be the refinement and finalisation of the product’s features, which will be informed by a cocreation (with ≥40 early adopters and other stakeholders), validation, and market engagement process implemented over two complete innovation cycles, so that the LIBS-RS system evolves to meet both commercial and technical demands with the goal of ensuring its success in the marketplace. In turn, the product-related features and ability to implement the inspection system in two different scenarios in relation to the applications will inform our business model development, whereby as was seen static spot will be suited for single and non-conveyed samples (such as the ones from mining prospection to be inspected in an at-line setup), whereas dynamic spot will be suited for moving samples (such as raw materials or products on a conveyor belt which are typical in the recycling sector).
How the activities support the commercialisation and other relevant aspects (intellectual property rights, regulation, certification and standardisation): Our project activities integrate industry and market feedback, business strategy, technical validation, and regulatory compliance, creating a solid foundation for the successful commercialisation of the LIBS-RS system to ensure the system is market-ready, legally compliant, and attractive to a range of industries. While our market entry application segment is plastics recycling (leveraging the PVC use case), we aim to quickly move into adjacent segments in the online waste recycling industry (Table 1), as well as prepare for other industrial applications (real-time monitoring in the process industries, environmental monitoring, among others), which will be analysed based on our market research and consultation process with our network of 19 European and international distributors covering 27 countries and a wide range of industrial segments.
Fundamental to this is the creation of a comprehensive business and financing plan, which will integrate a market feasibility analysis, cost-benefit assessments, and a clear IP strategy. The identification of market demand, ensuring the financial viability of the product, regulatory costs, and potential returns on investment, in addition to a plan for scaling up the technology post-project will prepare us for a fluid Time to Market (TTM)- which we estimate could be within 24-36 months based on previous experiences of scaling up and accelerating spectroscopy-based devices to market- and the commercialisation process.
In parallel, the product development will be deeply linked to the broader commercialisation efforts. Cooperation with industry from the PVC production and recycling space (Deceuninck, Veolia, PreZero, INEOS), a sorter OEM (PICVISA), the wider process industries (A.SPIRE), Regional Development Agency (ACCIO) and standardisation bodies (UNE), among other stakeholders,  provides a cocreation opportunity for developing a dual spectroscopic fusion analyser that is unique in the competition landscape. This co-creation and industrial validation of the functional prototype will provide critical proof of concept, demonstrating its capability in real-world environments, with a by-design approach to obtaining the necessary certifications and meeting industry-specific standards. Deploying the system in industrial settings will highlight its effectiveness, generating the data needed to navigate regulatory requirements and move towards certification.
IRIS will execute a strong IP strategy (discussed below), protecting the innovations with IPR tools- utility models, patents, trade secrets, trademarks- as assets for competitive advantage, which could also open potential licensing opportunities to expand the system’s market reach in the future. In parallel, the team will map out the regulatory and certification landscape, ensuring the product meets all necessary legal and industry standards, which not only supports compliance but also strengthens the system’s market credibility, making it more attractive to customers and partners alike. As an opto-electronic inspection system intended for industrial deployment, the device will be designed to comply with CE marking directives, including the Low Voltage Directive (LVD), Electromagnetic Compatibility (EMC), and the Machinery Directive where applicable. In parallel, harmonised standards such as IEC 61010 (safety requirements for electrical equipment for measurement, control, and laboratory use) and ISO 9001 for quality management will guide the system’s engineering and production. Moreover, the AI components will be developed in line with the EU AI Act, integrating Trustworthy AI principles such as transparency, robustness, and human oversight. Early engagement with standardisation bodies (UNE, with LOI secured) will ensure alignment with emerging technical standards, particularly in spectral instrumentation and waste sorting systems, and will allow the VISUM LRS to anticipate the certification pathways necessary for market entry.
Strategy for IP management: Our strategy for the management of intellectual property (IP) to ensure Freedom to Operate (FTO) and to adequately protect our results as relevant to ensure the commercial exploitation of the project.
Firstly, IRIS confirms it owns the background from the REMADYL project that is being used in this EIC Transition project, i.e. the prototype, knowledge and knowhow related to the development of an identification and sorting system based on LIBS technology integrated in a continuous recycling line processing PVC waste. No Background IPR is needed from any Third Parties.
In relation to the proposed development in this EIC Transition project, whereby we will develop a LIBS-Raman dual spectroscopic fusion analyser that leverages common hardware in an optical fusion, and uses hybrid emsembling for spectral data fusion, we have conducted a first patentability study (using patent libraries- EPO and WIPO) to identify potential IPR issues with existing technologies & patents. We have established our FTO and differentiation points. Our IP strategy is to protect this development with IPR tools (patent and/or utility model), and we are engaged with our patent attorney’s ClarkeModet to commence preparations for IP registration. We will also register the Visum LRS as a trademark (we already have trademarked the VISUM brand in Europe and USA). We will also assess other IPR tools, such as design rights and trade secrets. All IP assets will be owned by IRIS Technology Solutions, and will support exploitation by protecting our innovation, providing competitive market exclusivity, attracting investment, enabling licensing opportunities, and strengthen brand identity, all of which drive business growth and market success.
Market potential: In the REMADYL project, the IRIS innovation (‘Prototype allowing for the sorting of PVC waste according to the presence or concentration of Lead’) was selected as the Key Exploitable Result (KER) for benefiting from the Business Plan Development services of the Horizon Results Booster programme. As such, with expert advice of the BPD services team, including mentoring and specialised workshops, we performed initial exploration of potential markets. In addition, we engaged with one of the most important manufacturers and recyclers of PVC window frames in Europe, Deceuninck, to define industrial requirements,  and to test and validate the prototype and demand. We also assessed the offering in the competition landscape and positioned our differential value. Key findings and updates are summarised below (focussed on our market entry PVC recycling use case):
■ Market entry segment /early adopters: Plastics recycling segment, targeting early adopters from the PVC recycling use case, i.e. Recyclers and PVC-based product manufacturers who recycle PVC containing lead stabilizers in order to re-process and build new PVC products containing limited amounts (<0.1%) of lead. Region: Spain (domestic market) and Europe (well networked with flagship early adopters, which makes this viable, and we also have a European distribution network currently covering Spain, Portugal, Germany, Poland, Ukraine, France, Belgium, Switzerland, Turkey, Greece, Slovakia, Czech Rep).
■ Unmet problem: With the new regulations entering into force, these businesses must ensure PVC does not contain 0.1% of lead (as well as other restricted LS). Currently, they do not have access to technically and economically viable solutions for recycling PVC according to its lead content, and these businesses are at risk of non-compliance.
■ Market size: Within the global plastics recycling market that was valued at US$ 46.8 Billion in 2024, and predicted to reach US$ 101.6 Billion by the year 2034, at a 8.1% CAGR, the PVC recycling market was valued at approximately US$ 3.3 billion in 2023 and is expected to grow to US$ 4.9 billion by 2028, at a CAGR of 8.0% (MarketsandMarkets, GlobeNewswire). This is a compelling use case to target, as an affordable dual spectroscopy fusion analyser for detecting the concentration of both lead stabilisers (LIBS) and plasticisers (RS) in the one system would represent a significant leap forward for PVC recycling, and would give us an ‘unfair advantage in the market’.
■ Market segmentation: For our PVC recycling use case, the market can be further segmented by Stabiliser Type use, whereby we will only target recyclers and manufacturers processing PVC with Pb stabilisers. Furthermore, old PVC constitutes most of current hard (e.g. window frames, tubes) and soft (e.g. flooring or cables) post-consumer PVC waste. As such, companies recycling (and reprocessing) these types of products will be the main target, and to further segment our market entry strategy, we could prioritise PVC recyclers/producers of window frames and tubes. In the EIC Transition, we will expand the market analysis and segmentation to map out additional segments that will inform our GTM. As discussed, we aim to quickly move into adjacent segments in the online waste recycling industry (Table 1), as well as prepare for other industrial applications (real-time monitoring in the process industries, environmental monitoring, among others).
■ SOM: For the market entry use case, IRIS will tackle a 1% of the total PVC recycling market (to be updated in EIC Transition market analysis work in WP3 and WP6). Driver: The system ensures compliance with European regulations: EU's Restriction of Hazardous Substances (RoHS) directive restricts lead and its compounds in all electrical and electronic products. The limit is 0.1%. The EU has expanded the restriction of lead to PVC articles under entry 63 to Annex XVII of REACH. The new law will become effective on November 29, 2024. The latest amendment restricts lead to < 0.1% in PVC polymer and copolymer articles.
■ Competitors: Key players such as TOMRA and PICVISA dominate the large-scale industrial sorting market. Their solutions are built around traditional optical and spectroscopic technologies (e.g. NIR, RGB, XRT, and in the case of TOMRA’s AUTOSORT™ PULSE, conventional LIBS). However, none currently offer an integrated LIBS–Raman hybrid inspection system capable of detecting low-concentration contaminants such as lead stabilisers and phthalates with the required sensitivity for compliance with EU regulations. However, they are also potential OEM partners as part of our GTM (Go to market) strategy. They provide optical large-scale sorting solutions that can sort at high speeds and can process high amounts of feedstock. A LOI from PICVISA will allow us to explore partnership OEM licensing opportunities. Discussions are underway to explore a technology licensing model whereby VISUM LRS could be integrated into PICVISA’s existing sorting platforms to enhance their capabilities. On the sensor front, Lasertechnik Berlin’s CORALIS system is one of the few examples of an integrated LIBS–Raman analyser. However, it is a laboratory-grade instrument, limited to static, small-area sampling due to its compact XYZ stage and Raman microscopy setup. CORALIS is not designed for real-time, high-throughput industrial environments and lacks the optomechanical and AI-driven integration needed for dynamic inline sorting. Precisely IRIS’s market positioning is in bridging the critical gap between laboratory-grade spectroscopic instruments and industrial-scale sorting performance. The VISUM LRS is a category-defining innovation that combines detection sensitivity, integration readiness, and AI intelligence to deliver the next generation of Process Analytical Technology (PAT) for real-time materials inspection.
■ Willingness to Pay (WTP): Positive, as the sorting technology promotes sustainability, circularity and re-use of lead, and importantly is an enabler for regulatory compliance. It is timely. If we consider the ambitious targets of VinylPlus 2030, which is the current 10-year Commitment of the European PVC industry to Sustainable Development, to achieve ≥1 million tonnes/year of recycled PVC used in new products by 2030, and to foster science-based solutions for the safe and sustainable use of additives (such as innovative sorting technology), the VISUM LRS clearly addresses a recognised and urgent market demand. It will help recyclers in future-proofing their operations, reducing risk, and unlocking premium markets for compliant recycled PVC. There are 2 key drivers: the need (compliance) & the lack of low-cost alternatives to satisfy this need. This is an optimum scenario.
Validation of problem/solution fit: A very robust approach for validating the product/solution fit of the LIBS-RS system is through our participatory cocreation process (requirements and specifications scoping with ≥ 40 industry early adopters and stakeholders- e.g. Deceuninck, Veolia, PreZero, INEOS, PICVISA, UNE, SPIRE, ACCIO), as well as performing a pilot deployment in an industrial PVC processing and recycling facility (Deceuninck in Belgium) where the system’s ability to detect and sort contaminated PVC waste can be directly tested in real-world operational settings. Deceuninck is a very credible early adopter to be engaged with, as designer, developer and distributer of cutting-edge window, door and building profiles, with a deep commitment to sustainability, and who now face strict regulatory requirements for hazardous material detection. They are ideally placed to validate both the technical and economic value of the solution. During the pilot, we will gather quantitative data on sorting accuracy, speed, and efficiency, along with qualitative feedback on ease of integration into existing workflows. The validation process will allow us to measure KPIs such as compliance with lead detection regulations (below 0.1%), ability to detect plasticisers and other LS, to validate the system's reliability, and the impact on overall operational efficiency. Thanks to the two innovation loops that will be performed in the project, we will be able to incorporate Deceuninck’s feedback into the iterative development process, and also inform the post-project upscaling roadmap based on insights from operators, which will help refine the product features, as well as from the business level in relation to how well the LIBS-RS system addresses their pain points—such as the need for rapid, real-time monitoring and the capability to sort materials based on lead content, investment costs, operational savings, ROI, removal of risk of non-compliance, etc., which will inform Business Case Studies for wide dissemination. ■ Addressing CAC (Customer Acquisition Cost): Our go-to-market strategy is designed to minimise CAC through deep early adopter engagement, co-development with an industrial pilot site, and strong OEM and distributor alignment. Through our LOI with PICVISA (a leading OEM in sorting and recycling equipment), we gain access to an existing sales and support infrastructure, reducing the need for costly direct sales. Our global network of 19 reputable and experienced distributors covering 27 countries across Europe, Latin America, Asia and North Africa, and who already serve relevant industrial customers, further lowers customer acquisition effort and enables faster penetration across target segments. They are also well positioned and understand their industrial markets and are a very credible route for problem/market validation. By demonstrating regulatory compliance and cost savings during the pilot (e.g. reduced rejection rates, less reprocessing, lower regulatory risk), we will build a compelling ROI case that supports rapid adoption across existing sales channels.
Planned measures to maximise the impact of the project: We have prepared an initial ‘Plan for the dissemination and exploitation, including communication activities’ (hereafter DEC Plan), which is discussed below:
Communication Activities: Our communication strategy is underpinned by a clear definition of our target groups, communication goals, key messages, and tools & channels to be used (Table 4). Overarching goals are to: 1) generate awareness about the VISUM LRS among our EU and international channels & industry clients, research/academic partners, stakeholders (industry associations, clusters, regional and national development agencies, policy makers), our employees and the general public; 2)  mobilise the engagement and participation of key industry decision makers and stakeholders over the course of the project.
Table 4- Target groups of our communication strategy
Our experienced marketing department will lead the design and implementation of our communication strategy, which will be supported with a suite of communication tools and content, among them:
Branding. VisumLRS will form part of trademarked VisumTM brand (positioned for tech leadership, innovation, service, reliability).
Website. Incorporate dedicated pages in our corporate website to present the project; our SEM/SEO strategy (identifying and optimising the most suitable key words for increasing visitor traffic, which will be monitored & analysed to obtain visitor insights).
Content strategy. Include Visum LRS in our content strategy, producing high quality blog content that will be published on our website and pushed out via our established social media channels (e.g. LinkedIn >18,000 followers).
Communication materials (print, digital and audiovisual): flyers, roll up and banners (displayed in our offices- exposure among our employees, visiting clients and partners, and used at tradeshows/exhibitions), videos (effective short clips: showcasing the technology, its applications & benefits/presenting our participation in EIC Transition/interviews with key researchers or engineers/interviews with early adopters, etc.).
Exhibitions and Tradeshows: participation in ≥3 tradeshows/exhibitions, e.g. International Fair of Recovery and Recycling (SRR); The Plastics Recycling Show Europe, etc.
Publications: ≥3 commercial publications in online/offline magazines and blogs.
PR strategy: well-timed and prepared Press Releases to coincide with key development milestones and outputs (issued through relevant press channels, including the European Commission News Section).
Dissemination of the Project Results: In line with an Open Science Strategy, we will ensure the early and wide dissemination or public disclosure of all the non-confidential project results, via appropriate means, including scientific publications. The main dissemination tools, among others, that we will use are:
Scientific publications (≥2) in relevant Open Access journals- e.g. Recycling; Resources, Conservation & Recycling Advances (RCR Advances); etc.; Participate in ≥3 international exhibitions and conferences- oral/poster/papers, e.g. International Fair of Recovery and Recycling; Share results on online media (research data, software, reports); Organise ≥2 training and workshop sessions; Demo Days or Hosting Individual Companies to showcase the development to ≥40 prospective users/customers over the course of the project.
Standardisation activities: IRIS will engage with UNE (representing CEN-CENELEC in Spain), with whom we have active cooperation (in 2024 we received the UNE Award for the Integration of Standardisation and Innovation). We will meet with UNE in the early stages of the project (and thereafter every 6 months), to update our review of existing standards, ensuring compatibility with market conditions and increasing transparency for prospective customers, and to assess potential to contribute to standards.
Exploitation: The main goal of our exploitation plan is to make use of the results of the project for post-project scale up, for a swift TTM so that we can bring to market a brand new high-performance dual spectroscopic fusion analyser (Visum LRS). To date no off-the shelf similar industrial-grade LIBS-Raman PAT device exists, paving an opportunity to be first to market and open the door to numerous real-time monitoring and inspection applications in waste recycling, mining, (bio)pharmaceuticals, environmental monitoring, as well as in health, agriculture, and defence. The exploitation plan will be completed in line with the Technology Scale Up Roadmap (produced in WP5) and the Business Model & Business Plan development activities (WP3, WP6).