3.2 KPIs and milestones: The table below summarises the key technological and go-to market (GTM) KPIs and milestones for the Visum LRS, which are relevant to track progress along the pathway towards objectives.

Table 6- Technological and GTM KPIs and Milestones
Additional risk mitigation for scale-up and dual spectroscopic fusion/integration: The development and industrial integration of the VISUM LRS involves critical technical risks, particularly due to the spectroscopic fusion of LIBS + Raman modalities that differ significantly in their physical requirements. As discussed, challenges include: ■ finding the case-dependent optimum laser-peak-power to excite the intense Raman signal while keeping the sample below its degradation threshold; ■ designing an optimised collection optics to gather Raman scattered photons while keeping the mechanical compatibility with the sample geometry and the rest of the system’s components; ■addressing optical alignment and synchronisation issues among Raman excitation & its spectra acquisition and LIBS plasma generation & its spectra acquisition, and any possible sample displacement over the whole process; ■ in the case of conveyed samples (as required for a sorting system), making the inspection system compatible with multipoint probing with a useful spatial resolution for industrial-grade challenges. These risks will be mitigated by: ■ use of common hardware & software frameworks for both LIBS + Raman -albeit using different settings for each technology; ■ developing 2 distinct implementation modes depending on the application: static spot -for single and non-conveyed samples (such as those in  e.g.  mining prospection) to be inspected in an at-line setup; and, dynamic spot -for moving samples, raw materials or products on a conveyor belt, like that of the waste recycling application (in this case if needed we will explore combining the dual spectroscopic fusion analyser with a traditional artificial-vision subsystem for properly targeting the inspection points in real-time). ■For high-speed throughput, we will use pre-trained lightweight ensemble models, parallel GPU processing & a hierarchical triggering system to optimise real-time analysis while maintaining detection accuracy. ■ Staged validation approach (laboratory →pilot → industrial) will further de-risk performance challenges. ■From a resource standpoint, shared components and standardised subsystems will help manage complexity & cost. ■ Industrial pilots with Deceuninck & OEM engagement (PICVISA) contribute to wide compatibility across sector-specific constraints.
Among critical market risks, could be competitor innovation outpacing the project’s market readiness especially given the current acceleration in smart sensor deployment and advanced spectroscopy. To mitigate this, we will continuously monitor competitor activity and maintain a strong focus on product differentiation through superior performance, real-time AI integration, flexible deployment, service/support and pricing flexibility. Our optimal size is an advantage in terms of agility to react. Smaller players do not have the resources for reducing TTM and bigger players are too inertial for efficiently reacting to new market trends.