4.  Ethics ................................................................................................................................................................. 42  
  
  
1 Excellence #@REL-EV A-RE@#
1.1 Objectives and Ambition #@PRJ-OBJ-PO@#  
W2W Motivation and Strategic Vision: Wood is a natural, renewable, and biodegradable material with impressive 
mechanical and thermal properties. According to future projections, due to its increasing use for energy production, 
and in products such as building materials and chemicals, wood pro duction may be insufficient to meet European 
demand by 20301. At the same time, there is an increasing volume of wood contained in Construction & Demolition 
(C&D) waste (20-30% of the total building-related C&D) and furniture waste (10 million tonnes of furniture are  
  
discarded by businesses and consumers in EU Member States each year Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8305270 - 
05/12/20232). Recycling these streams can provide an  
abundant and cost-effective raw material source. In addition, waste wood streams (from industrial and urban waste) 
contain significant amounts of fossil-based carbon from coatings, paints, plastics, and preservatives, which could be 
recycled using innovative processes (amon g others, chemical recycling), making their valorisation one of the 
priorities of the Processes4Planet (P4P) partnership for wood waste processing. However, recycling processes are 
greatly complicated by the presence of additives (glues, varnishes, and paints), pollutants (wood treatment products 
 
1 Alex Forrest, Mark Hilton, Ann Ballinger & Daniel Whittaker, Circular Economy Opportunities in the Furniture Sector, European  Environment Bureau, (2017).  

  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]  
3  
  
and heavy metals), and contaminating materials (glass, plastics, metals, etc.), and further research and development 
are needed to improve them. Other challenges are the irregular and unpredictable availability of such waste streams, 
the complexity of sorting and cleaning processes, and the gaps in existing regulations which may not fully support 
the use of upcycled wood materials. As a result, current wood waste management strategies still prioritise landfill  
and energy recovery, over material recovery2.  To tackle these challenges, W2W proposes a comprehensive  
framework for multi-dimensional cascade4 valorisation of wood from C&D and furniture waste, consisting of four 
core components/pillars : 1) Advanced Separation and Sorting Technologies; 2) Upcycling Processes and 
Technologies; 3) Digital Tools for Improving Circular Flows of Secondary Materials; and 4) Supportive Framework 
in Policy, Market, and Skills. W2W will demonstrate efficient and sustainable value chains for the production of: 
wood without pollutants; biocomposite building materials; biopolymers; pol yols; chemical detergents; and the 
recovery of nutrients, through the use of technologies and tools that allow the selection of optimal cascade paths for 
further uses of wood products and their materials. The W2W holistic approach will reduce the demand fo r virgin 
materials, reduce the amount of waste that ends up in landfills or incineration facilities, allow for the creation of new 
value-added products from waste materials, and support the transition towards a circular economy by promoting  
closed-loop systems where materials are continually repurposed and reused, extending their useful life.   
1.1.1 W2W Objectives and Success Criteria   
O1: To produce and validate the W2W comprehensive framework in terms of stakeholder interactions, 
wood characterisation and classification, wood valorisation and management technologies, data sharing 
principles, and impact assessment methods.  
W2W will produce the requirements for a comprehensive framework for Construction & Demolition Waste 
(CDW) cascade valorisation and recycled wood management, drawing on the principles of multi -dimensional 
cascade valorisation by identifying the different ca scade value chain stakeholders and their interactions. A 
harmonised framework for recycled wood classification will be developed, considering the different schemes 
available in EU countries. The requirements for an integrated wood cascade valorisation fram ework will be 
developed, proposing a set of technologies (related to waste management and digitalisation), and considering 
nontechnological aspects (policy, market, skills, standardisation, certification). The multi -dimensional approach 
will be utilised to consider the time, value, and function of recycled wood throughout its lifecycle, with a focus on 
maximising its economic, social, and environmental benefits while minimising its negative impacts. Link to Key 
Exploitable Results (KERs): KER17 - KER24   
Relation to the call: “Increase the use of secondary resources in the process industry […] reduction of CO2 
emissions; reduction of waste sent to landfill and overall positive environmental impact.” ; “energy efficiency 
techno-economic and life-cycle assessment considerations of the overall process.”  
KPI O1.1: To produce a harmonised framework for wood classification in Europe published in a policy brief.   
KPI O1.3: To develop 8 technologies supporting the implantation of the developed framework.   
KPI O1.3: To develop a data sharing model and the respective tools among all the identified stakeholders. KPI 
O1.4: To validate the sustainability performance of the designed framework based on techno-economic and Life 
Cycle Assessment (LCA) considerations.  
O2: To improve the separation capabilities of wood sorting mechanisms in line with environmental and 
technical valorisation parameters.   
W2W will develop an advanced separation and sorting system for optimising the cascade valorisation of wood 
particles. The project will focus on determining the optimal particle size for efficient and effective valorisation, 
with the aim of maximising the v alue and utility of the material while minimising its environmental impact. An 
adaptive sorting system based on cascade valorisation thresholds will be developed to enable the efficient and 
automated separation of wood particles based on their quality and potential uses. Human-robot collaboration and 
mixed reality technology will be utilised to improve the accuracy and speed of the separation and sorting process, 
enabling more efficient and effective management of waste materials. The project will also prov ide a set of 
guidelines and recommendations for the development and implementation of advanced separation and sorting  
  
 
2 Besserer, A.; Troilo, S.; Girods, P.; Rogaume, Y .; Brosse, N., Cascading Recycling of Wood Waste: A Review. Polymers 2021, 13, 1752, https://doi.org/10.3390/polym13111752 4 
Cascading use is defined as the efficient utilisation of resources by using residues and recycled materials for material use to extend total biomass availability within a given 
system.  
3 Höglmeier, K., Weber-Blaschke, G.; Richter, K. Utilization of Recovered Wood in Cascades versus Utilization of PrimaryWood —A Comparison with Life Cycle Assessment Using 
System Expansion. Int. J. Life Cycle Assess. (2014), 19, 1755–1766.  
  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]  
4  
  
 
systems for the cascade valorisation of wood particles, with the potential to contribute to the broader goal of Associated 
with document Ref. Ares(2023)8305270 - 05/12/2023 
promoting a circular economy and sustainable waste management practices. Link to KERs: KER1 - KER3     
Relation to the call: “The proposed technologies should contribute to the matching of supply-versus-demand of 
feedstock at the level of quality constraints.”; “Considering the upgrading of secondary resources which include 
development of better separation and sorting technologies.”  
KPI O2.1: To achieve a 95% accuracy of wood separation from mixed CDW sources.  
KPI O2.2: To adoptively sort wood based on dynamically updated classification criteria with 90% accuracy.  
KPI O2.3: To allow collaboration between Robots and humans with non-latency constraints.   
O3: To develop sustainable and innovative technologies for upcycling waste materials, including cascade 
refinement, chemical and bioremediation processes, and energy, gas and ashes valorisation, to promote 
resource efficiency, waste reduction, and sustainable waste management.  
By encompassing three main themes, namely cascade refinement, chemical and bioremediation processes, and 
energy/gas/ashes valorisation, W2W aims to promote resource efficiency, waste reduction, and the development 
of a circular economy through the sustaina ble and scalable cascade valorisation of resources coming from C&D 
wood waste, the development of advanced chemical and bioremediation processes for additive removal, and the 
exploration of innovative approaches for energy and gas valorisation, in cases wh ere material recovery is not 
possible. By developing these innovative approaches and technologies, the project seeks to contribute to a more 
sustainable future by reducing environmental impacts, promoting circularity, and enabling informed 
decisionmaking in waste management practices. Link to KERs: KER4 - KER11    
Relation to the call: “Ensure consistent quality and safety of recyclates and their suitability for the upcycling 
process itself.”; “Detection and removal additives in the secondary resources stream.”  
KPI O3.1: At least 3 value chains are developed and validated end to end including all the relevant stakeholders. 
KPI O3.2: The replication potential of the developed technologies to be performed in at least one more sector.   
O4: To develop innovative approaches and digital tools for enabling the integration of life cycle thinking and 
advanced sustainability assessments throughout the cascade process.  
W2W will develop tools that will enable stakeholders to perform sustainability assessments of the full wood 
cascade process, taking into account closed loops of materials processed by a variety of available technologies, 
and considering supply chain limita tions from feedstock to end use. This will make it possible for industry and 
policy stakeholders to identify trade-offs between alternative cascade paths and allow for improved, evidencebased 
decision-making. W2W will develop an LCA-based tool to predict and assess the impact of different cascade paths 
or sequences for possible further uses of wood products and their materials. It will also develop a Supply Chain 
management tool for the optimisation of upcycling of secondary materials. The use of these tools will be supported 
by a Digital Product Passport (DPP), containing detailed information about wood-containing product's materials, 
components, and environmental impact throughout their lifecycle, and a multi -interface digital platform for 
circularity/upcycling information exchange that will enable relevant stakeholders (businesses and/or consumers) 
to share information about the environmental impact of products. Link to KERs: KER12 - KER16    
Relation to the call: “Foster data sharing, and F AIR digital assets principles, considering the application of DPP 
between recycling companies and the process industry to improve the economy of scale in upcycling of material 
streams.”; “Successful upcycling relies on advanced monitoring and sensing in the process industries and value 
chains, and on improved data completeness, accuracy and interoperability between the process and the recycling 
companies. Upcycling may create new business opportunities and models.”; “Proposals should include energy  
efficiency techno-economic and life-cycle assessment considerations of the overall process.”  
KPI O4.1: LCA-based cascade process sustainability assessment tool validated in the 3 proposed value 
chains.  
KPI O4.2: Supply chain optimisation tool validated in the 3 proposed value chains.  
KPI O4.3: DPP incorporates and regularly updates a minimum of 5 material parameters.  
KPI O4.4: Multi-digital interface platform integrating several digital tools/services (i.e. dynamic LCA, dynamic 
DPP) developed by Month 48 with at least 200 active users.  
O.5: To validate W2W technologies/solutions in 3 Use Cases, representing different value chains.  

  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]  
5  
  
The project focuses on sustainable waste management practices in the construction, pulp and paper and chemicals 
sectors, with the implementation of three Use Cases that will concentrate on specific areas of waste management. 
The first Use Case  will emphasise on resource efficiency and waste reduction of C&D wood waste through 
cascade biorefinement, which involves the separation of lignin and cellulose to create composite wood materials 
for various industries, including pulp and paper. The second Use Case  will focus on innovative approaches to 
additive removal using advanced chemical and bioremediation processes for sustainable waste management, 
relevant to both the pulp and paper and chemicals sectors. The third Use Case  will explore energy and g as 
recovery potential from CDW through hydrothermal carbonisation, gasification, ashes valorisation, and dodecanol 
production via H2/CO2 upcycling, also relevant to both sectors. The developed cascade valorisation approach will 
be assessed for replicability in other industrial sectors, such as glass waste derived from CDW. This will enable  
the exploration of the potential for the transferability and adaptation of sustainable waste management approaches 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8305270 - 04/12/2023 to a broader range of industries. Link to KERs: ALL    
Relation to the call: “Prove the technical and economic feasibility of the use of secondary resources in the process 
industry leading to products with identical properties and performances as those produced using primary 
resources and allowing production without quality restriction.”; “The innovative upcycling of the secondary raw 
materials should be demonstrated through at least two realistic use cases […] technology providers;” ; “pursue 
the involvement of all the actors in the value chain from the process industry.”  
KPI O5.1: To demonstrate the application of all the developed technologies at TRL 6 in 3 use cases. KPI 
O5.2: To develop at least 3 cross-sector business models.  
O.6: To increase competitiveness and promote sustainable practices in industries through skills 
development, collaborative training programs, capacity building, contributions to standards and 
certification schemes, policy influence, and business models in circular and sustainable processes.   
W2W aims to augment competitiveness, certification, and policy for promoting circular and sustainable practices 
in industry, including an integrative approach to skills development that incorporates social partnerships, synergies 
between learning initiatives a nd circular economy hubs, collaborative design of training programs, promoting 
capacity building and inclusive growth, and driving sustainable practices through contributions to standardisation 
and certification. A market analysis and the co -design of busi ness models with prospective customers and 
stakeholders participating in the pilot activities will offer an evidence -based pathway for further developing and 
commercialising W2W outputs. Link to KERs: KER20, KER24    
Relation to the call: “To increase the use of unused and new skills to unfold the potential of the technological 
solutions at the workplace for upcycling and contribution to inclusive growth.”; “A strategy for skills development 
should be presented. Particular attention should be given to the cooperation with existing initiatives.”  
KPI O6.1: Fulfilment of Dissemination, Communication and Exploitation KPIs, as described in Section 2.2.  
KPI O6.2: Financial feasibility of 3 value chains to be validated and sustained post-project implementation. KPI 
O6.3: Development of at least 2 major training activities and lifelong learning programs  co-designed with 
relevant stakeholders and initiatives, to promote upcycling, replication, and cooperation.  
KPI O6.4: To produce 1 policy brief for wood classification and 1 for C&D wood waste cascade valorisation.  
KPI O6.5: At least 3 certification proposals formed for secondary raw materials after analysing value chains.  
1.1.2 Ambition – Research and Innovation Maturity of the W2W Pillars   
W2W aims to provide cross -sectoral – from sensing to sorting & from materials to products – digitally 
enabledsolutions to increase waste reduction, improve use of secondary raw materials, thus, lead to circular and low 
emission value chains. This is achieved through 4 main innovation pillars, as presented below.    
1.1.2.1 Pillar 1: Advanced Separation and Sorting  
A) Separation Technology for Optimal Wood Particles Size  
State of the Art Analysis & Challenges: Spectroscopic methods as near-infrared hyperspectral imaging (NIR-HSI) 
are often used as analytical techniques to determine the presence of wood by-products, to detect the wood by-products 
quality and classify the suitable materials for valorisation. In particular, they can be used for detecting the moisture 
content5, for the classification of wood according to species6 and to differentiate untreated waste wood5. In the case 
 
4 a, T., Morita, G., Inagaki, T. et al. Moisture transport dynamics in wood during drying studied by long -wave near-infrared hyperspectral imaging. Cellulose 29, 133 –145, (2022).  6 
Kanayama, H., Ma, T., Tsuchikawa, S. et al. Cognitive spectroscopy for wood species identification: near infrared hyperspectral imaging combined with convolutional neural networks. 
Analyst 144, 6438-6446, (2019). http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/C9AN01180C  
5 So, C. L., Lebow, S. T., Eberhardt, T., et al. Application of Near Infrared Spectroscopy to Preservative-Treated Wood, Wood and Fiber Science (2021).   

  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]  
6  
  
of wood chips, laser scanning, machine vision and image processing can be applied to calculate and categorise them 
according to their size, and determine the percentage of rot in residues6.  
Ambition: In the W2W project, optical and spectroscopic characterisation techniques will be used to determine 
which the most efficient particle size of wood and glass coming from CDW to further process these materials. Certain 
process parameters, such as the size of  shredding of wood-by products, will be correlated with the wood and glass 
sorting effectivity. Moreover, an innovative offline NIR handheld device working with advanced chemometric 
models will be used to analyse relevant product parameters.  
B) Adaptive Sorting System based on Cascade Valorisation Thresholds  
State of the Art Analysis & Challenges : Sorting systems currently developed for CDW are evaluated based on 
simple metrics, such as picks per time unit and rate of successful material classification 7,8. For separating wood, 
commercial sorting systems are deploying robotic arms and specialised grippers11,9, while for glass waste air jet- 
  
 
6 Grigorev, I., Shadrin, A., Katkov, S. et al. Improving the quality of sorting wood chips by scanning and machine vision technology. J Forest Sci, 67: 212–218, (2021).   
7 R. Sarc, A. Curtis, L. Kandlbauer, K. Khodier, K.E. Lorber, and R. Pomberger, “Digitalisation and intelligent robotics in val ue chain of circular economy-oriented waste management 
– A review”, Waste Management, V olume 95, 476-492, (2019).  
8 R. Bogue, “Robots in recycling and disassembly”, Industrial Robot: the international journal of robotics research and applica tion, V olume 46, Pages 461-466, (2019). 11 
OP Technik ab, https://www.opteknik.se/sorteringssida?lang=en  
9 Zen Robotics, https://www.terex.com/zenrobotics/  
  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8305270 - 05/12/2023 
7  
  
based separators are used 10. Although typical CDW sorters depend on several factors related to the quality of the 
stream and the sorting technology, these metrics can reach up to 4,000 picks per hour (per robot) and 95% accuracy 
respectively. These metrics are essential for the performance of the sorting system itself, but improving them does 
not necessarily maximise the overall impact of the sorting process towards the optimum valorisation of the wood 
waste. Thus, currently employed sorting systems do not attempt to monitor the output stream characteristics and do 
not take into consideration valorisation needs and material composition during their planning.   
Ambition: W2W aims to redesign the entire sorting process to focus primarily on cascading valorisation of the input 
material. A multi-robot composite sorting system capable of separating wood and glass from mixed CDW with more 
than 95% accuracy will be deployed, whi le the sensor equipment will be chosen based on the optimal particle size 
decided above and the classification threshold will be dynamically updated based on the classification thresholds 
defined for each valorisation flow. The classification thresholds shall be dynamically defined based on sustainability 
assessment criteria and the input of the project digital tools supporting production planning and supply-vs-demand.  
C) Human-robot Interaction/Collaboration Technology & MR Solution enabling Advanced Separation Capacity  
State of the Art Analysis & Challenges: Apart from the chemical contamination on the surface, which has been the 
focus of most research work, a wide range of physical impurities are also present on CDW materials 11 . These 
impurities are normally removed after size reduction with suspension magnetic separators for ferrous metals or eddy 
current separators for non-ferrous metals14. For wood waste, it is quite common for nails, screws and bolts to remain 
in the material after passing through the separators due to the strong connection with the material, while plastic 
impurities due to their physical properties cannot be affected by the aforementioned separation processes. 
Nonetheless, a large number of novel studies has been de voted lately to robotic disassembly of known complex 
products12. In these processes, however, there is a key limitation in the capacity of the robot to understand and 
perform the large range of required disassembly tasks, a challenge that is magnified in waste sorting due to the 
variety of sizes and geometries of the waste particles. A human worker, on the other hand, is quite dexterous to 
handle many of the tasks and collaborate with the robot, while MR facilitates their coordination and communication. 
Mixed Reality (MR) offers an interface to seamlessly simplify the collaboration between operators and robots, 
applied to many settings of their interaction, such as gesture control and programming13.  
Ambition: A Human Robot Collaboration process will be established within W2W project with the objective of 
decreasing waste due to physical impurities. It will take advantage of important qualities of human workers, e.g., 
increased dexterity and advantages of the co llaborative robots, such as endurance to remove all sorts of impurities 
from the contaminated wood. Specifically, an automated task coordinator will divide the workload based on vision 
input of the workpiece into tasks attainable by the robot and  tasks that need to be performed by the human worker. 
Taking advantage of MR technology to positively influence operator -related aspects such as performance, task 
awareness, and safety feeling, W2W offers the right settings for efficient and effective guidance of humans through 
augmented interfaces to avoid unnecessary costs and time consumption14. MR challenges the conventional operation 
of collaborative robots (cobots), via user friendly and intuitive interface communication, resulting in an improvement 
of the accuracy to time ratio, and minimisation of the workload by pointing out to humans’ tas ks that cobots are 
either not programmed to perform, or do not have the advanced capabilities to do so.  
Tool / Technology 
/Activity  
Key Advantage & Progress – Start TRL  Foreseen End TRL  
Separation technology for 
optimal wood particles size  
A wood processing unit based on correlation analysis of particle size and cascading 
valorisation value: TRL4TRL6  
Adaptive sorting system   
A high accuracy, high performance sorting system that separate different classes of 
wood and glass waste from CDW streams while adapting to dynamic cascade 
valorisation thresholds: TRL4TRL6  
Human-robot  
interaction/collaboration   
Human-robot interaction/collaboration technology and MR solution enabling 
advanced separation capacity: TRL4-->TRL6  
1.2.1.2 Pillar 2: Novel Technologies for Upcycling    
 
10 Z. Yao, B. Qin, Z. Huang, J. Ruan, Z. Xu, “Green Combined Resource Recycling System for the Recycling of Waste Glass”, ACS Sustainable Chem. EngPages 7361–7368, (2021).  
11 G. Faraca, A. Boldrin, and T. Astrup, “Resource quality of wood waste: The importance of physical and chemical impurities in wood waste for recycling”, (2019).  
12 H. Poschmann et al. , ”Disassembly 4.0: A Review on Using Robotics in Disassembly Tasks as a Way of Automation”, Chemie Ingenieur Technik, V ol. 92, 4, (2020).  
13 Hörbst, J., Orsolits, H. (2022). Mixed Reality HMI for Collaborative Robots. In: Moreno -Díaz, R., Pichler, F., Quesada-Arencibia, A. (eds) Computer Aided Systems Theory –  
EUROCAST 2022. EUROCAST 2022. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 13789. Springer, Cham . https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-25312-6_63   
14 Costa, G.d.M.; Petry, M.R.; Moreira, A.P. Augmented Reality for Human–Robot Collaboration and Cooperation in Industrial Applications: A Systematic Literature Review. Sensors  
2022, 22, 2725. https://doi.org/10.3390/s22072725   
  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8305270 - 05/12/2023 
8  
  
A. Cascade Refinement Technologies for Wood Waste Upcycling  
#Production of Lignin and Cellulose Fibers from Wood Waste  
State of the Art Analysis & Challenges : Limited numbers of works have been reported in literature about the 
fractionation of mixed wood15,16 into its main components that could be used for different applications. There are  
  
two major concerns regarding wood treatment for fiber production: (1) the lengths of fibers obtained from waste 
wood are often shorter than those obtained from native wood; and (2) the fibers produced retain debris, such as 
plastics or decorative elements (e.g., melamine coating). As they also still contain some of the additives originally 
contained in the waste wood (glues, paints, fungicides, etc.), achieving efficient and effective use of wood resources 
requires considering multidimensional valorisation of wood, including time, value, and function.   
Ambition: The development and optimisation of the operation conditions of fractionation process able to produce 
lignin and cellulose fibers from the feedstock, will take place during W2W. Two main natural reinforcements will be 
isolated from wood waste by the use of chemical and mechanical treatments: 1) Unmodified CNF17 will be provided 
as water solution containing 6 to 9% of solid (cellulose). Solvent exchange will be done to replace portion of water 
by ethanol; and 2) Modified CNF and lignin will be provided in solid state.  
#Production of Bio Composites Reinforced with Wood Fibres  
State of the Art Analysis & Challenges : The current state -of-the-art in sustainable composite 21,18  production 
involves the use of natural fillers or reinforcement agents, such as fibers from plants. However, the hydrophobic and 
nonpolar character of the polymeric matrix used in most research studies poses challenges to fiber -matrix 
compatibility and homogeneity; this incompatibility is challenging for both the processing (discontinuous feeding, 
flow of the melt) and the final properties of the composites (poor mechanical strength). Compatibilisation is 
attempted either through chemical modification of the fibres or  through the addition of surfactants or 
compatibilizers/coupling agents. These factors limit the integration of wood fibers produced from wood waste into 
the industrial manufacturing cycle.  
Ambition: W2W innovation will be based on the combination of PLA (poly(lactic acid)), as a biodegradable 
polymeric matrix, and biodegradable lignocellulose-based materials derived from wood waste, yielding an entirely 
sustainable biocomposite structure. Optimisatio n of compounding conditions in melt mixers and twin -screw 
extruders along with testing different types of commercially available PLA and PLA -copolymers will construct a 
toolbox to correlate PLA type-wood waste cascade refinement technology-compounding conditions-properties data 
and will permit the selection of the adapted materials per targeted application. Indicatively, the compatibility and 
mixing potential of the derived W2W wood fractions with PLA grades of different stereochemistry, different 
molecular weights and melt flow rates, etc., will be assessed based on the biocomposites morphology, thermal and 
mechanical characteristics, and will be improved through the fine tuning of the applied fractionation technology 
and/or compatibilization approaches.  
B. Chemical and Bioremediation Technologies for Wood Waste Upcycling  
#Physicochemical (Steam Explosion) Treatment of Wood Waste  
State of the Art Analysis & Challenges: The presence of residual glue on the surface of the wood fibres or particles 
makes their recycling more difficult, especially to produce new wood panels. Recently, a process based on steam 
explosion for the removal of UF resin has been developed. This process opens the way for the recycling of fiberboard 
panels19 . Comparing to other technologies like Hot Pressurised Water treatment (HPW), steam explosion (SE) 
technology is a very promising process for the recovery of medium -density fiberboard MDF fibers, allowing 83% 
of the resin removal accompanied by an efficient fragmentation in a very short time and water consumption. Other 
MDF hydrothermal treatments for MDF recycling reviewed in literature lead to a fiber shortening of 30%20 Steam 
refining performed in comparable conditions lead to a fiber yield of 75%21. Although the SE and SEW techniques 
have taken place in recent studies in experimental level, a fiber yield of 80% w/w (±2%) was achieved.   
 
15 Maarouf Abdou Alio, et al., Microwave-assisted Organosolv pretreatment of a sawmill mixed feedstock for bioethanol production in a wood biorefinery, Bioresource Te chnology, 
V olume 276, 2019, Pages 170-176, ISSN 0960-8524, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2018.12.078.  
16 Xuejun Pan, et al., Biorefining of softwoods using ethanol organosolv pulping: Preliminary evaluation of process streams for manufacture of fuel -grade ethanol and co -products, 
Biotechnology and Bioengineering, V olume 90, Issue 4, Pages 473-481, 2005, https://doi.org/10.1002/bit.20453.   
17 Baraka, F., Robles, E., Labidi, J. Microwave-assisted esterification of bleached and unbleached cellulose nanofibers (2023) Industrial Crops and Products, 191, art. no. 1 15970 21 
Didho M,n et al. Lignin as green filler in polymer composites: Development methods, characteristics, and potential applicatio ns (2022). Hindawi Advances in Materials Science.   
18 Singh, A., Genovese, M., Mancini, G., Marina, L., Athanasssiou A., (2020). Green processing route for polylactic acid-cellulose fiber biocomposites. ACS Sustainable Chemistry  
& Engineering, 8, 4128-4136  
19 Troilo, S., Besserer, A., Rose, C., Saker, S., Soufflet, L., Brosse, N., 2023. Urea -Formaldehyde Resin Removal in Medium -Density Fiberboards by Steam Explosion: Developing 
Nondestructive Analytical Tools. ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng. 11, 3603–3610. https://doi.org/10.1021/acssuschemeng.2c05686  
20 Lubis, M. A. R.; Manohar, S. Y .; Laksana, R. P . B.; Fatriasari, W.; Ismayati, M.; Falah, F.; Solihat, N. N.; Sari, F. P.; Hidayat, W. The Removal of Cured Urea-Formaldehyde Adhesive 
towards Sustainable Medium Density Fiberboard Production: A Review. J. Sci. Lett. 2021, 9, 23.  
21 Hagel, S.; Saake, B. Fractionation of Waste MDF by Steam Refining. Molecules 2020, 25, 2165.  

  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8305270 - 05/12/2023 
9  
  
Ambition: Within W2W, wood containing Adhesives/Pollutants with potential of removal will be treated by SE and 
the process will be up scaled from TRL4 to TRL6. It is expected that a fiber yield of more than 80% w/w will be 
achieved, going beyond the efficiency achi eved in experimental stage. The recovered fibers will meet the 
specifications to be utilized as fillers for polymers production with improved properties.  
#Fermentation and Fungal Growth for Detoxification of Hazardous Wood   
State of the Art Analysis & Challenges: In recent studies, the morphological characterisation and quantification of 
the mycelial growth of the Brown -Rot Fungus Postia placenta has taken place. Parameters affecting their growth 
were identified while the parameter values were used for calibrating the model for simulating the mycelial growth. 
The growth characteristics were statistically analysed in relation to the different durati on of the colony 
development22.The morphological characterisation and quantification of the mycelial growth paves the way for the  
  
treatment of wood containing adhesives/pollutants, through fungi fermentation. For this purpose, microorganisms 
with tolerance in preservatives like Postia placenta could be used.  
Ambition: Wood waste belonging to BR2 and C classes will be initially subjected to mycoremediation to remove 
hazardous substances. Two ways will be explored for mycoremediation: (1) Solid state fermentation with wood 
preservative tolerant fungi by using both Postia placenta and Trametes versicolor strains as control strains to establish 
the proof of concept. Then a fungal strain screening will be done to find the best fungal specie(s ) for 
mycoremediation. (2) Submerged fermentation with wood preservative to lerant microorganisms, by using 
fungalbacteria consortia with Postia placenta as fungus and Burkholderia strains. Optimisation of the liquid 
detoxification phase will be performed using first reference fungal strains known to be active in formaldehyde 
detoxification at lab scale. After validation of the detoxification efficiency, complementary analysis of the incubation 
medium will be performed to screen occurrence of molecules with potential interest in material manufacturing or 
biocontrol activity.  
#Liquefaction of mixed Waste with Organic Catalysts for Polyol Production  
State of the Art Analysis & Challenges: Polyols are industrially produced mainly by ring-opening polymerisation 
(ROP), radical and ionic polymerisation, and condensation polymerisation pathways. The synthesis of low -cost 
polyols from abundant and renewable biomass resources has created industrial interest. In line with the anionic ROP 
(AROP) process, biomass-derived polyols have been developed over the decades. Biomass oxypropylation has been 
researched intensively over the last decades with different natural polymeric substrates that contain hydroxyl groups. 
Nevertheless, this traditional method based on anionic ROP has several drawbacks related to the aggressive 
conditions employed. Therefore, the reaction requires special equipment to ensure safety agains t explosions and 
reaction conditions, increasing the final cost of the polyols considerably, hampering any industrial application.  
Ambition: To circumvent these drawbacks, a more industrially feasible alternative route should be developed. In 
W2W, a new process based on cationic ROP using acid catalysts will allow synthesising bio-polyols with a controlled 
structure under mild conditions. Polyols will be synthesised using two approaches: liquefaction process and using 
ROP. Polyol will be produced by ROP of oxiranes in the presence of mixed waste and in an organic solvent or 
mixture thereof using acidic catalysts. The process will be upscaled from TRL4 to TRL6.  
C. Energy, Gas & Ashes Valorisation Technologies for Contaminated Wood Waste  
#Hydrothermal Carbonisation through Microwaves   
State of the Art Analysis & Challenges: Hydrothermal carbonisation (HTC) is carried out in wet and at supercritical 
conditions producing mainly process water rich in nutrients and organics and solid rich in carbon (hydrochar). This 
process is already commercialised mainly for sewage sludge treat ment at the wastewater treatment plants 23 . 
However, there are not reports or evidence of the implementation of the HTC treatment as part of another waste 
management process, such as wood containing waste, in a commercial scale. In recent years, hydrothermal treatment 
has attracted increasing atte ntion as one of the most promising methods for the treatment of various solid wastes. 
These wastes can be converted into stable aluminosilicate minerals materials, and meanwhile achieve the 
stabilization of heavy metals in the final hydrothermal products when operating in alkaline environments. In addition, 
current hydrothermal systems combined with microwaves are just tested in lab-scale, as their upscaling to industrial-
scale devices needs complex designing and simulation know -how that first needs to be nurtured with intensive 
experimental outputs. Microwave-assisted hydrothermal processes for ash valorisation with this aim are not clearly 
described in literature. Ambition: HTC of mixed waste (contaminated wood waste and liquid waste e.g., sludge, 
 
22 Du H, Lv P, Ayouz M, Besserer A, Perré P (2016) Morphological Characterization and Quantification of the Mycelial Growth of the Brown-Rot Fungus Postia placenta for Modeling  
Purposes. PLoS ONE11(9): e0162469. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0162469   
23 Klaudia Czerwińska, Maciej Śliz, Małgorzata Wilk, Hydrothermal carbonization process: Fundamentals, main parameter characteri stics and possible applications including an 
effective method of SARS-CoV-2 mitigation in sewage sludge. A review,  
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, V olume 154, 2022, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2021.111873.  
  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8305270 - 05/12/2023 
10  
  
MSW, etc.) will be employed at lab scale (TRL4) and validated in a TRL6 HTC reactor. In this project, a more 
efficient “HTC 2.0” concept is proposed consisting in HTC assisted through microwave exhibiting the following 
advantages: 1) The reaction temperature is limited to 150 –300°C, which is lower than other thermal treatments 
(>900°C); 2) The subcritical hydrothermal treatment of CDW-Flying Ash (FA) is carried out in a closed autoclave, 
which prevents the diffusion of dioxins or heavy metals into the air, posing fewer health threats to operators; 3) 
Microwave heating method involves novel pathways with extremely high potential of energy efficiency and 
renewable energy-toelectrification strategies. The process will be upscaled from TRL4-TRL6.  
#Biotech-driven Upcycling of Syngas into Dodecanol for Low Impact Detergents Application  
State of the art and challenges: Dodecanol (C12H26O), or lauryl alcohol, is today one of the mostly used long chain 
alcohol intermediates to produce almost any kind of detergent; in Europe it is produced industrially from imported 
palm kernel oil/coconut oil or from fossil-based ethylene by using the Ziegler process, causing relevant impacts on 
the environmental sustainability24,29. Some attempts have been done at lab scale to obtain biobased medium and long 
chain molecules from sugars fermentation through engineered microorganisms. In the past three years, KIV has  
  
patented and successfully completed a deep experimental campaign to develop and validate at TRL4, a custom 
synthetic biology toolkit and oxyhydrogen engineering chassis for the production of dodecanol . This toolkit 
includes vectors, recombinases, CRISPR precision editing, libraries of gene expression regulatory elements, a 
genome-scale metabolic model and computational tools for operon design. This has led as main starting achievement 
to a library of recombinant oxyhydrogen strains (C.necator) specifically engineered to produce the C12 fatty alcohol 
dodecanol showing a productivity > 1g/lt h. The KIV proprietary organism has an incredibly rapid growth rate and 
produces biomass continuously at productivities of up to 3g/L/h.  
Ambition: W2W will leverage KIV’s extensive knowledge for further engineering the dodecanol production strain 
to enhance productivity compared to the state-of-the-art process (from 1 to than 1.5-2g/lt h of dodecanol). The overall 
process with enhanced performances will be tested using syngas from waste derived from hydrochar gasification in 
combination with additional CO2 sources from biogas cogeneration; TRL will be progressively increased from TRL5 
(20Lt gas fermenter volume) to TRL6 (100Lt gas fermenter volume). Dodecanol together with by-products from the 
process (biomass cells as source of amino acids) will be validated into the formulation of ionic -surfactants for 
specific applications in detergency sector with small scale consumer exposure tests proving both technical and safety 
requirements, achieving properties at least equivalent to those from primary resources.   
  
Tool/Technology/Activity  Key Advantage & Progress – Start TRL  Foreseen End TRL  
Wood Cascade Refinement   
Wood cascade to function, Fractionation of mixed feed stock: TRL4 --> TRL6 
Production of biocomposites reinforced with wood fibers, Wood composites for 
wallboards: TRL4TRL6  
Chemical and  
Bioremediation processes  
Wood glue separation, Physicochemical (Steam explosion) treatment of wood waste: 
TRL4TRL6; Bioremediation wood treatment: TRL4TRL6; Production of bio 
polyols suitable for the synthesis of NIPUS, Liquefaction of mixed Waste with 
organic catalysts for polyol production: TRL4TRL6  
Energy and Gas  
Valorisation technologies  
Hydrothermal Carbonization through MW, Ashes valorisation  TRL4TRL6 
Biotech-driven upcycling of syngas into dodecanol for low impact detergents 
application: TRL4TRL6  
1.1.2.3 Pillar 3: Digital Tools for Improving Circular Flows of Secondary Materials  
(A) Life Cycle Sustainability Assessment for different Cascade Pathways   
State of the Art Analysis & Challenges: Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) studies related to recycling of wood often 
omit the management stages, such as the separation and collection processes, don't cover details of the process in 
every life cycle step, and focus on the environmental perspective, rather than the economic and social perspectives25. 
For a cascade approach, there is a need to track material pathways over several use cycles. Another challenge is that 
the quality and consistency of data on the wood material stream in Europe is generally not satisfactory 26 (partly 
 
24 Shah, J., et al., Comparison of Oleo- vs Petro-Sourcing of Fatty Alcohols via Cradle-to-Gate Life Cycle Assessment. J. Surfactants Deterg. 19, 1333–1351 (2016).  
29 Anagha Krishnan, Bonnie, A. McNeil and David T. Stuart. Biosynthesis of Fatty Alcohols in Engineered Microbial Cell Factories: Advances and Limitations, Biotechnol., (2020)  
25 Jahan, I.; Zhang, G.; Bhuiyan, M.; Navaratnam, S. Circular Economy of Construction and Demolition Wood Waste—A Theoretical Framework Approach. Sustainability 2022, 14,  
10478. https://doi.org/10.3390/su141710478   
26 Vis M., U. Mantau, B. Allen (Eds.) (2016) Study on the optimised cascading use of wood, No 394/PP/ENT/RCH/14/7689. Final repo rt. Brussels 2016. 337 pages  
  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8305270 - 05/12/2023 
11  
  
because it is often not recovered separately but instead collected, managed and disposed in a mix with other CDW), 
making it difficult to perform a detailed assessment.  
Ambition: W2W will combine LCA, Life Cycle Cost Analysis (LCCA), and Social Life Cycle Assessment (S-LCA) 
to perform an integrated Life Cycle Sustainability Assessment (LCSA), where the three dimensions of sustainability 
(environment, economy, and social aspects) wi ll be considered. LCSA will support the identification of trade -offs 
between the dimensions and allow for better decision -making in policy making and industry. Machine Learning 
methods will be used for the prediction of missing data, forecasting impact parameters both directly and indirectly.   
(B) Material Volume Estimation  
State of the Art Analysis & Challenges: Estimating the volume of waste materials is a challenging task and it has 
attracted a lot of research interest mainly because of their diversity. Challenges concern low accuracy of computer 
vision methods, and failure to clearly distinguish among waste mat erials. In addition, different settings render the 
development of more generic methods a conundrum. There are various approaches to waste estimation using 
computer vision methods and photogrammetry to tackle the aforementioned issues. Deep learning methods are used 
for segmenting the various materials 27,28 but they usually need a more contained environment in order to approach 
the task efficiently. Stereo vision is another popular approach where the materials are captured from different angles 
in order to generate a 3D model that will eventually serve for th e volume calculation. These methods concern 
primarily construction and demolition waste. However, generating the correct 3D model is a complex process that 
might lead to inaccurate results. Furthermore, LiDAR and hyperspectral imaging approaches can also be employed 
as well as methods assisted by UA Vs29,30, however, such equipment increases the cost significantly.  
  
Ambition: In W2W, computer vision methods will be applied for mixed waste volume estimation. For the efficient 
material volume estimation: i) multisource data will be used in order to accurately generate the 3D models, ii) images 
will be acquired from conventional RGB cameras, iii) a mixture of ground and aerial images will be used, and iv) 
semantic segmentation of the waste will be performed to characterise the waste material and complement with their 
volume estimation. Eventually, a tool for volume estimation and material recognition in mixed waste cases will be 
developed capable at operating in different settings.  
(C) Supply Chain Management for the Optimisation of Upcycling of Secondary Materials        
State of the Art Analysis & Challenges: A cascade approach requires additional logistics operations to realise mass 
and energy flows between material use, chemical use and energy use, which may be performed by different 
stakeholders who may be at distant locations. These processes come along wit h environmental effects, which must 
be quantified and considered with respect to the overall effect of cascading utilisation. The quantification of the 
positive environmental effects and of the trade-offs with other consequences of cascade utilisation, however, remains 
an open question both in theory and practice31.   
Ambition: W2W will develop a supply chain optimisation digital tool for secondary materials for managing the 
process of recycling wood along the supply chain. The tool will use advanced algorithms and data analysis techniques 
to simulate various scenarios to help co mpanies identify the most efficient and cost -effective supply chain design 
and operation for optimising the flow of secondary materials throughout the recycling process, from collection to 
processing and distribution.  
Tool / Technology /Activity  Key Advantage & Progress – Start TRL  Foreseen End TRL  
Lifecycle Sustainability Assessment 
for different cascade pathways  
The currently available technology for LCA studies will be extended to support 
cascade paths. Machine Learning will be used to fill data gaps: TRL4 TRL6  
Material V olume Estimation  
AI-based Material V olume Estimation Tool using own equipment for use in 
diverse settings. The tool in its final version will be validated in a real -world 
setting: TRL4TRL6  
Close Loop Supply Chain 
management tool   
Close Loop Supply Chain management tool for upcycling optimisation of 
secondary materials: TRL4TRL6  
1.1.2.4 Pillar 4: Framework for CDW Cascade Valorisation  
State of the Art Analysis & Challenges : The cascading concept aims to increase the efficiency of biomass 
utilisation and is promoted in bioeconomy strategies as a proper practice for potential biomass limitations. There are 
three approaches of cascading: (i) cascading-in-time - conceptualised as a sequential use of biomass through reusing 
 
27 Chen, J., Lu, W., Y uan, L., Wu, Y ., & Xue, F. (2022). Estimating construction waste truck payload volume using monocular vision. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 177.  
28 Dong, Z., Chen, J., & Lu, W. (2022). Computer vision to recognize construction waste compositions: A novel boundary-aware transformer (BAT) model. environmental management.  
29 Filkin, T., et al., (2022). Estimation of dump and landfill waste volumes using unmanned aerial systems. Waste Management, 139, 301-308.  
30 Julge, K., Ellmann, A., & Köök, R. (2019). Unmanned aerial vehicle surveying for monitoring road construction earthworks. The  baltic journal of road and bridge engineering.  
31 Aidin Parsakhoo, Sattar Ezzati, Saba Pirov et al. Operational Planning of Optimal Wood Supply -Chain Network with Focus On Inbound Logistics Constraints, 17 March 2022.  
  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8305270 - 05/12/2023 
12  
  
or recycling and energy production at the end-of-life cycle, (ii) cascading-in-value - prioritising the highest possible 
value over the whole life cycle through optimisation of the time steps of the approach, and (iii) cascading-in-function 
- aiming to maximise the value of the original biomass through co-production32,33. A complete framework of cascade 
valorisation of C&D wood waste is currently lacking, and legislation has not been updated to reflect the potential of 
novel technologies for upcycling 39. There is also a lack of a common European Framework for wood waste 
classification into categories34. As an inert and biodegradable material, wood is easy and relatively cheap to send to 
landfills, which does not favour the emergence of wood recycling. Due to the complexity of upcycling cascade 
process (requiring additional sorting, cleaning, chemical or  mechanical treatment, transportation, etc.), energy 
recovery is prioritised.  
Ambition: W2W will fill the regulation gap for wood waste classifying wood based on: I) the type of chemical 
additives and components, II) the contamination level, and III) the place of origin (post-production: waste generated 
in the technological process of wood manufacturing, or post-consumer: waste generated from used wood products). 
A comprehensive framework for cascade valorisation of C&D recycled wood will be designed including mechanical 
recycling, cascade biorefinement, chemical and bioremediation p rocesses, and energy, gas and ashes valorisation 
processes.    
Tool / Technology /Activity  Key Advantage & Progress – Start SRL  Foreseen End SRL  
Framework for recycled wood 
classification   
A complete analysis of legislations/regulations, solutions of wood waste 
classification, and proposals for a common EU Framework: SRL5SRL6  
Framework for cascade 
valorisation of recycled wood  
A complete framework for optimal cascade valorisation of C&D wood waste:  
SRL4SRL6
1.2 Methodology #@CON-MET-CM@# #@COM-PLE-CP@#  
1.2.1 Overall Concept and Approach: Wood Cascade Valorisation from CDW  
The W2W approach aims to extract maximum value from CDW and furniture waste by prioritising multiple uses 
and transformations of wood, according to its composition, the availability of upcycling technologies, and supply 
chain restrictions. A description of how the W2W innovation pillars interact to continuously improve the value of 
the secondary resources throughout the upcycling process is shown in Figure 1.1. The approach considers different 
cascade paths, according to the circular economy principles, for  upcycling wood available in C&D and furniture 
waste: 1. Sequential reuse of materials after their separation: reuse of materials in their original form for similar 
or alternative applications; 2. Cleaning: when materials can no longer be reused in their original form, the cascade 
approach promotes repurposing by removing additives and delivering wood of better quality; 3. Upcycling: 
transformation into higher -value products; 4. Energy recovery  of materials that no longer be repurposed or 
upcycled.  
 
32 M. Jarre, A., et al., Transforming the bio-based sector towards a circular economy - What can we learn from wood cascading?, (2020), doi: 10.1016/j.forpol.2019.01.017.  
33 E. Robles, et al., “V alorization of heat-treated wood after service life through a cascading process for the production of lignocellulosic derivatives,” Resour. Conserv. Recycl., (2021).  
39 The Waste Framework Directive set a 70% target for reuse and recycling applies to CDW in general by 2020. However, as wood re presents 20-30% of CDW, this target 
did not serve as an incentive to set up wood collection schemes. In theory, this target could be achieved with 0% of wood being recycled. The amendment of Landfill Directive 
drives the shift from landfill to the EU’s waste hierarchy but does not present any specific wood measures.   
34 Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Netherlands, Slovenia, Switzerl and, Turkey, UK have set regulation 
for wood waste categorisation into 3 to 5 (mainly 4) categories considering the source, components, chemical additives, quality, contamination level and the treatment method 
of wood waste. Source: ttps://unece.org/sites/default/files/2021-03/ece-tim-efc-wp2-2021-inf-5.pdf  
  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8305270 - 05/12/2023 
13  
  
 
The W2W Advanced Separation and Sorting  Technologies (Pillar 1) will enable the automated separation of 
wood particles from C&D waste based on their quality and potential uses. It is assumed at this stage that wood can 
belong to 4 generic classes (the classification framework eventually proposed by the project will be part of the policy 
recommendations). The W2W Upcycling Technologies (Pillar 2) will enable the processing of recovered wood 
(through mechanical recycling and cascade biorefinement, chemical and bioremediation processes, and 
energy/gas/ashes valorisation) to produce higher value products. The Digital Tools for Improving Circular Flows 
of Secondary Materials  (Pillar 3)  will facilitate transparency and collaboration among stakeholders (Digital 
Product Passport), support decision making (LCA cascade potential calculator, Material volume estimation), and 
optimise the supply chain (Supply Chain management tool for the optimisation of upcycling of secondary materials). 
The Supportive Framework in Policy, Market, and Skills (Pillar 4)  will address non -technological aspects to 
ensure that the project's innovations are effectively implemented and supported at all levels. In particular, a) the 
W2W skills development strategy will provide targeted training programmes to equip workers with the necessary 
skills for the uptake and deployment of the project technical innovations; b) the W2W policy recommendations 
will help shape the regulatory environment to support the implementation of W2W principles and technologies in 
the EU context; c) the W2W Business Models will support the commercialisation of the W2W outputs; and d) the 
Contribution to  Standardisation and Certification  will help to promote the adoption of project results by 
providing a common language and framework for communication between different stakeholders. By addressing 
these categories in an integrated manner, the W2W project can effectively work towards develo ping a 
comprehensive, innovative, and sustainable approach to the circular management of wood -containing waste in the 
European Union.  
The different components of the W2W approach are presented below.  
Pillar 1: Advanced Separation and Sorting of Mixed Waste from CDW   
An advanced multilayer sorting system of mixed waste from CDW will be developed in W2W, such as the one 
illustrated in Figure 1.2. Multi -sensor systems (i.e., Hyperspectral, ΜWIR, X-ray, RGB cameras, NIR, FTIR) will 
be used in critical spots of the sorter to classify the type of CDW assisted by machine- or deep- learning techniques 
(e.g., neural network models) while the separation of waste stream or removal of the negative compounds will be 
Figure 1.1 
: 
  
W2W overall concept 
  
  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8305270 - 05/12/2023 
14  
  
succeeded using robotics arms, collaborative robots 
and humans. In contrast to available commercial CDW 
sorters35, the proposed system will dynamically adapt 
the separation thresholds based on LCA results and 
valorisation  
requirements, while the feature of human -machine 
Figure 1.2: Advanced multilayer sorting system of mixed 
waste collaboration for disassembly needs 36  will be 
explored and evaluated, increasing the overall sorting 
efficiency under the Industry5.0 human-centric pillar. 
In operation mode, unsorted CDW will be transported 
onto a conveyor belt by a feeding and vibration system 
to ensure an even spread across the width of the input 
conveyor. Utilising the multisensor system, the 
position of the wastes within the input conveyor will be determined and the valorised category will be selected in 
order to drive the robotic system. Specifically, the wastes will be separated by means of a robotic system into three 
distinct flows, consisting of: (i) Wood waste containing metallic or assembly elements (e.g., nails, staples, wheels 
or others) will be directed towards a human -robot collaborative (HRC) separation line, le veraging the increased 
capabilities of HRC units to deal with complex elements in comparison to fully-autonomous ones. After the assembly 
elements are removed, wood elements re-enter the sorting line and follow the pure wood waste pathway. (ii) Pure 
wood waste after entering a shredding system to reach optimal particle size, will go through a second characterisation 
stage to be separated according to the presence of foreign materials. Pure wood will then be directed according to its 
valorisation properties into four bins, following the developed classification. (iii) Other C&D waste will exit the 
plant and be redirected for further processing. A study will also be performed on glass waste separation based on the 
recycling identification thresholds, aiming to assess the replication potential of the developed system to the glass 
sector. In addition, a glass adaptive sorting mechanism will be developed and evaluated in terms of performance and 
replication in the glass sector.  
Pillar 2: Upcycling Processes and Technologies  
The upcycling technologies are presented as part of the 3 project Use Cases in Section 1.2.3.  
Pillar 3: Digital Tools for Improving Circular Flows of Secondary Materials  
(A) Life Cycle Sustainability Assessment Tool for Cascade Pathways : W2W will develop a tool to predict 
and assess the impact of different cascade paths or sequences for possible further uses of wood products and their 
materials. Different scenarios will be constructed based on wood type, treatment, transportation, and en d-of-life 
management The tool will rely on three main data sources: (i) the Digital Product Passport for upcycled products, 
(ii) a digital product database, and (iii) a process database for circular actions and their impact on products. Data on 
how the different uses of the secondary resource occur over time will be considered to perform a dynamic LCA, 
making it possible to compare different paths, use a sustainable-by-design approach for the design of new products, 
and assist in investment decisions.   
(B) Material Volume Estimation: This tool will enable volume estimation and material recognition in mixed 
waste by using computer vision methods. It will use multisource data such as images from conventional RGB 
cameras, ground and aerial images. Semantic segmentation of the waste will be performed to characterise the waste 
material.   
(C) Digital Product Passport: The W2W Digital Product Passport (DPP) will be a digital document containing 
detailed information about wood-containing product's materials, components, and environmental impact throughout 
their lifecycle. It will provide information about the type, origin, and treatment of wood used in a product, and will 
help stakeholders identify the most suitable wood materials for cascading uses, as well as track the flow of wood 
waste in the supply chain. It will also include information on the product's environmental  impact throughout its 
lifecycle, including resource extraction, manufacturing, transportation, use, and end-of-life management. Eventually,  
  
the W2W DPP will facilitate collaboration and information sharing among different stakeholders involved in wood 
waste management, such as manufacturers, waste handlers, recyclers, and researchers.   
 
35 Sarc, R., Curtis, A., Kandlbauer, L., Khodier, K., Lorber, K. E., & Pomberger, R. (2019). Digitalisation and intelligent robo tics in value chain of circular economy -oriented waste 
management–A review. Waste Management, 95, 476-492.  
36 Liu, Q., Liu, Z., Xu, W., Tang, Q., Zhou, Z. and Pham, D.T., 2019. Human-robot collaboration in disassembly for sustainable manufacturing. International Journal of Production 
Research, 57(12), pp.4027-4044.  

  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8305270 - 05/12/2023 
15  
  
(D) Supply Chain Management Tool for the optimisation of upcycling of secondary materials: The Supply 
Chain Optimisation tool will use advanced algorithms and data analysis techniques to simulate various scenarios to 
assist companies in identifying the most cost-effective and efficient supply chain design and operation for improving 
the flow of secondary materials throughout the recycling process. This involves determining the optimal inventory 
levels of secondary materials at different stages in the supply cha in to meet customer demands while minimizing 
expenses, as well as optimising transportation by selecting the appropriate modes of transportation and carriers, 
managing routing and scheduling. In addition, users will be able to generate custom reports and t rack performance 
metrics over time, enabling them to identify areas for improvement and continue optimising the recycling process.  
(E) Integrated Circular Wood Upcycling Platform: This platform will integrate the digital tools developed in 
the project (Life Cycle Sustainability Assessment Tool for Cascade Pathways, Supply Chain management Tool for 
the optimisation of upcycling of secondary materials, and Digital Product Passport) into a common multifunctional 
and interoperable platform. The platform will enable: i) Processing and analysis of data from various stages of the 
wood lifecycle for identifying patterns and trends that can be used to optimise cascading use strategies and minimise 
environmental impacts; ii) Predictive modelling of the environmental impacts of different wood waste cascading 
scenarios; iii) Integration with Geographic Information Systems (GIS) to analySe the spatial distribution of wood 
waste sources, transportation routes, and processing facilities; and iv) Real-time monitoring of wood waste cascade 
strategies and adaptive management.  
Pillar 4: Supportive Framework in Policy, Market, and Skills  
(I) Framework for CDW Cascade Valorisation : W2W will offer two different frameworks; the first 
framework will introduce policy recommendations for recycled wood waste classification and proposals for a 
common European Framework (which will aim to harmonise the current national frameworks presented  in Table 
1.1). The proposed framework will strengthen the wood valorisation by transforming the existing streams to 
improved -in terms of quality, purity, and usability - by creating new flows of secondary materials dr iven by the 
improved up-cycling technologies. The second framework will contribute to policy impacts for the optimal cascade 
valorisation of recycled wood through the multi -dimensional approach (time, value, function) throughout its 
lifecycle, with a focus on maximising its economic, social, and environmental benefits while minimising its negative 
impacts. The project will produce a policy brief that can provide guidance for policymakers and stakeholders seeking 
to promote sustainable waste management practices, the development of a circular economy and at a longer term, to 
pave the way toward sustainable-by-design for circular products.   
Table 1.1: National schemes for wood waste classification  
Class A  Class B  Class C  Class D  
AT, BA, CA, FR, 
NL, UK  
AT, CA, FR, FI, GE, 
NL, SL, TR, UK  AT, CA, TR, NL  CA, FI, FR, GE, NL, Sl, SW, 
UK  
Unpainted & 
untreated wood,  
without or minor  
defects and a few 
restrictions on use  
Partially contaminated  
(painted, varnished, 
coated, glued etc.) wood 
without preservatives or 
halogenated compounds  
Hazardous waste wood –  
containing hazardous or toxic 
substances (e.g., paint,  
varnish, stain) or treated with 
halogenated organic materials  
Wood waste treated with wood 
preservatives containing 
hazardous substances (e.g., 
copper and chromium or  
copper, chromium, arsenic,  
and creosote)  
FI, GE, SL, TR,  
SW  BA, Switzerland  BA, FI, FR, GE, SL, SW, 
UK  AT, BA  
Pure wood, only 
mechanically 
treated,  
insignificantly  
contaminated with 
harmful substances  
Wood of average to A 
class quality, without  
specific requirements for 
pure wood  
Non-hazardous waste wood 
with low-concentration 
chemical additives and 
organic halogenated  
compounds in the coating, 
with no wood preservatives  
Wood waste that could not be 
assigned to other categories or 
components that are not wood 
waste (e.g., furniture with less 
than 50 mass -% wood)  
(II) Upskilling: W2W will provide timely access to relevant twin transition skills data and information - 
providing policy makers, employers and workers with expert advice to make informed decisions about training and 
career paths. This evidence will form the basis for innovative skills approaches, in the form of interventions tailored 
to effectively support the workforce through engaging the twin transition skills ecosystem. This covers also the 
dimensions of capacity building for skills development providers and engagement with policy makers to support the 
embedding of leading practices into policies and training programmes. Upskilling impacts will be attained at the 
levels of practical labour market and skills information, future -proofing career pathways, and providing ag ile 
  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8305270 - 05/12/2023 
16  
  
responses to skills needs. W2W emphasises providing the skills ecosystem actors with timely, accurate and 
practiceoriented data to anticipate changing skills needs and shape evidence -based interventions. It proposes novel 
approaches for the design of futur e-oriented, high-quality skills training. It deploys a certification process that is 
focused on equipping workers with required skills.  
(III) Contribution to Standardisation : W2W will develop a strategy for effectively contributing to the 
standardisation and certification of secondary materials. Through interaction with relevant committees, candidate 
topics for contributions will be identified. W2W will contribute to the deve lopment of new standards, submit 
proposals for modifying existing standards, and promote the elaboration of new standards. Fast-track standards like 
CEN-CENELEC Workshop Agreements will be considered, as the best-suited option for such research projects.  
(IV) Business Models: The project will co -design sustainable business models for the rollout of its innovative 
sorting, separation, and upcycling technologies, building on the evidence provided by the use cases and market 
research. The process will utilise the Triple Layered Business Model Canvas, complemented by lean value 
proposition design.  
1.2.2 Scientific Methodology   
The W2W concept relies on the implementation of a circular approach for the whole lifecycle of secondary resources. 
Circularity principles require integration of the entire value chain, implementation of detailed monitoring and sorting 
systems and assurance of increased use of secondary materials, as well as the integration of secondary resources in 
the processes. These requirements imply the execution of a comprehensive methodology that follows an iterative 
multistep development approach, in which user req uirements and corresponding solutions evolve through multiple 
iterative collaboration rounds involving all the stakeholders. The core of the methodology is agile approach, adaptive 
development and continuous improvement based on iterative rounds including the following 4 reciprocal phases.  
Phase 1: Data, Digital Assets and Wood Valorisation Framework (M01-M08)   
Main • To develop wood classification thresholds and a common valorisation framework  
• To map the stakeholders of the defined value chains and their data exchange needs  
Activities  
• To set an impact assessment methodology    
The first phase of the project sets the baseline for its execution. Α preliminary analysis of the secondary materials 
quality characterisation is done aiming to develop a common framework for the characterization and classification 
of recycled wood. Taking inro consideration and in parallel with the developed classification thresholds A framework 
for CDW recycle wood will be defined setting the basis for the cascade in value valorisation that W2W is envisioning. 
DRAXIS will be responsible for the mapping of interaction between actors and stakeholders as well as for the initial 
definition of impact assessment methodologies and KPIs to assess the developed framework. All the needed data 
exchange between the stakeholders, with FAIR principles, will be defined a nd retrofitted for development for the 
next phases of the project.   
This phase is performed the first 8 months of the project and covers WP1, WP4, WP16, and WP19).   
Phase 2: Design and Alpha version Development phase (M09-M18)  
Main • To design and develop at TRL5 the management of waste streams   
• To design and develop at TRL5 the upcycling and valorisation technologies for the 3 cases  
Activities  
• To design and develop at TRL5 the digital tools of W2W     
The outcomes of the thresholds, framework and KPIs will be retrofitted to the partners responsible for the 
development of the technologies, ensuring with the participation of the end users that no quality implications to the 
end products may be arisen.   
P2.1 Management of Waste Streams TRL5: At first, an analysis shall be performed with the participation of Public 
Authorities (RCM) and Private Recycling Center (ELAK) about the processing of CDW at multiple levels. Based 
on the results a modular CDW management system will be developed allowing the installation at various sites. ICCS 
will set up the first system on its premises allowing the processing of small quantities of CDW and being able to 
provide the feedstock to all the related partners developing the upcycling solutions.  
P2.2 Upcycling and valorisation technologies TRL5: Use case #1: UHE shall receive the feedstock coming out 
the sorting done by ICCS and produce the first samples of lignin and cellulose fibers. NTUA will receive from 
LERMAB the samples and produce the first pellets with biopolymers. Use Case#2 : LERMAB shall receive 
classified wood from ICCS as well as furniture feedstock coming from  ECOM and shall perform the first steam 
explosion tests at their facilities. The first remediation tests will also start. UHE shall perform the first tests and 
  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8305270 - 05/12/2023 
17  
  
validation of the liquefaction process. Use Case#3: CIRCE shall receive contaminated wood as feedstock and 
perform HTC at lab scale and then the first sample will be gasified. KIV shall receive the first bottles of syngas to 
perform a TRL5 validation. First sample of pure dodecanol will be provide to P&G for validation.  
P2.3 Digital tools TRL5 validation: The development of all the digital tools will be initiated and the architecture 
for integration to the W2W platform will be defined.  
This phase takes place from M10 to M18 and covers WP1), WP5, WP7, WP9, WP11, WP13, WP16, and WP19.   
Phase 3: TRL6 Development and Implementation phase (M19-M36)   
Main • To upgrade at TRL6 the management of waste streams    
• To upgrade at TRL6 the upcycling and valorisation technologies for the 3 cases  
Activities  
• To upagrade at TRL6 the digital tools of W2W     
P3.1 Management of Waste Streams TRL6: The sorting system at ICCS premises will process higher volumes of 
feedstock provided by ELAK and ECOM having all the components of the system in place.   
P3.2 Upcycling and valorisation technologies TRL6: Use case #1: UHE will increase the production of fibers and 
NTUA will produce the first pellets that will be delivered to FOCCHI for validation. Use Case#2: LERMAB will 
upscale to TRL6 the equipment and provide the sample for the production of the wallboards. The first tests of the 
produced boards shall be performed. Use Case#3: The system will be upgraded to TRL6 and higher volumes will be 
achieved.   
P3.3 Digital tools TRL6 validation: The W2W platform will be made available at TRL6 to all the partners allowing 
the first experimentation of all the developed tools.   
This phase takes place from M19 to M36 and covers WP2, WP6, WP8, WP10, WP12, WP14, WP17, and WP20.   
Phase 4: Pilot Activities and Validation (M37-M48)   
Under this phase, the end -users of the produced products ( FOCCHI, P&G) will receive the end products and 
evaluate their performance. The whole system will continue to operate performing a full impact assessment based 
on the validation results to the developed valorisation framework. Final conclusions from standardisation an d 
certification activities will be drawn. Moreover, once the final results have been gathered together with feedback 
from main stakeholders, corresponding policy recommendations final business models, enhanced learning programs 
and further exploitation strategy will be defined.   
This phase takes place from M37 to M48 of the project and covers WP3), WP15, WP18, and WP21.   
Training and upskilling activities will be taking place alongside the whole duration of the project with a 
continuous improvement of the context based on the project results. The D&C activities will use as inputs the 
outcomes obtained in each WP - a detailed plan of D&C is presented in Section 2.2.   
1.2.3 Overview of the Sustainable Value Chains of Secondary Materials  
  
Use Case #1: Cascade Refinement Technologies for Wood Waste Upcycling  
This Use Case involves a four -stage process (Figure 1.3) to produce 
composite building materials from wood waste: i) Production of lignin 
and cellulose fibers from the wood waste (UHE); ii) Production of pellets 
by combining the produced fibers with biopolymers (NTUA); iii) Pellets 
are formed into building material components ( NTUA); and iv) Testing 
of the new building materials in mock-ups (FOCCHI).   
Challenges to be Addressed : There are significant challenges to be 
addressed for sustainable production of composites reinforced with 
natural fillers deriving from plant fibers. First, not all polymers are 
compatible with wood fibers; for example, polyolefins are not the most 
appropriate biopolymer matrices for natural fibers because of their 
nonpolar character. On the other hand, the use of more polar  
thermoplastic matrices such as PMMA (Poly( methyl methacrylate)), PVC (poly(vinyl chloride)) and biodegradable 
polyesters is an alternative to obtain compatibility between natural fibers and a matrix even without compatibilizers 
Material Input: #Class B wood waste: lightly admixed products, #Class 
C wood waste: heavily admixed products   
Figure 1.3 
: 
  
Process for c 
ascade  
r 
efinement  
  
  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8305270 - 05/12/2023 
18  
  
or special fibres treatment37,38Another challenge is that the fibers deriving from wood waste do not always meet the 
required specifications due to the fact that their length is shorter than required and additionally are contaminated 
with retained debris such as plastics, glues, paints, fungicides, etc. These limitations make it difficult to integrate 
wood fibers produced from wood waste into the industrial manufacturing cycle.  
W2W Solution: #Production of lignin and cellulose fibers from wood waste: The use of reinforcement filler derived 
from natural waste will permit to overcome the handicaps that prevent the use of PLA from a large share of the 
construction market. Protocols for isolation, purification and characterization of fillers as well as s tandards for 
modification/functionalisation will be defined. Cellulose nanofibers (CNF) from cellulose pulp will be extracted by 
mechanical and/or chemical treatment (unmodified and mo dified CNF) and will be used as filler for the selected 
polymer. The functionalised or unfunctionalized fillers will be incorporated into PLA via melt-compounding in lab 
scale using internal mixing chambers, followed by a compression -molding process to produce samples for further 
characterization. Mechanical and physical properties of these resulting PLA-based composites will be determined.  
As the ultimate step, the UV-ageing of related PLA composites will be considered as a key to produce materials with  
  
improved outdoor resistances against light. #Production of biocomposites reinforced with wood fibers: Within W2W, 
the matrix and fiber compatibility issue will be addressed using a PLA polymer matrix in combination with fibers 
from wood waste that will act as biocomposites’ fillers. As soon as the fibers are extracted from wood waste, they 
will be integr ated in PLA biocomposites to improve PLA thermal and mechanical properties. Optimisation of 
compounding conditions in melt mixers and twin -screw extruders a nd testing of different types of commercially 
available PLA and PLA -copolymers will take place. The hydrolytic stability of PLA -based materials will be 
considered and -as this property is related to the COOH - two different approaches will be adopted to imp rove it. 
Accelerated thermal and hydrolytic ageing studies will be carried out by NTUA to assess ageing kinetics with the 
aim of lifetime prediction modelling.   
Obtained End Products : The end products derived from the process mentioned above will be biocomposite 
building materials produced by wood nano-fibers, glass fibers and biopolymers.   
Product Validation and KPIs: Overall, the validation process of the new composite material in the façade industry 
will be done through a comprehensive approach that considers different aspects such as environmental impact, 
performance, and market potential. By integrating the composi te component in a façade prototype that will be 
developed, based on physical and dimensional features of a composite panel, FOCCHI will demonstrate the benefits 
of the new material and its potential to replace traditional produc ts such as gypsum board. The comparison with 
“traditional” façades will be performed using specific KPIs such as thermal performance, fire resistance, and 
mechanical strength. Acoustic tests will be performed to provide valuable information about the sound  insulation 
properties of the composite panel. The results of these tests will be used to compare the composite acoustic 
performance with other products available on the market. The tests will be conducted according to current regulations 
guidelines, in certified laboratories. The prototype will be installed in a real case room in which microphone sensors 
will monitor the acoustic performance.   
Increase of secondary 
raw materials use  
Waste 
reduction  
GHG emissions 
reduction  
Up-cycling, reuse and upgrade secondary 
raw materials technologies implemented  
By-products 
value increase  
30%  30%  20%  3  >50%  
  
Use Case #2: Chemical and Bioremediation Technologies for Wood Waste Upcycling   
This Use Case involves wood pollutants removal through steam explosion, detoxification of the aqueous effluent 
from the steam explosion and liquefaction of mixed waste with organic catalysts for polyols production, following 
the process illustrated in Figure 1.4. LERMAB is focusing on the valorisation of #1 Wood containing 
Adhesives/Pollutants with potential of removal, whereas UHE is focusing on the liquefaction of #2 Mixed wood 
waste with the usage of various catalysts. ECOM is the provider of feedstock regarding furniture material, whereas 
the CDW will be provided as a result of the W2W sorting process.    
 
37 Le Digabel F., Boquillon N., Dole P., Monties B., Averous L., (2004). Properties of thermoplastic composites based on wheat -straw ligonecellulosic fillers. Journal of Applied 
Polymer Science 93, 428-436   
38 Averous L., Le Digabel F., (2006). Properties of biocomposites based on lignocellulosic fillers. Carbohydrate Polymers, 66, 4 80-493.  
  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8305270 - 05/12/2023 
19  
  
Figure 1.4: Chemical and bioremediation for wood waste upcycling process  
Material Input: # Class B wood waste: lightly admixed products, # Class C wood waste: heavily admixed products 
Challenges to be addressed : The main contaminant of recycled wood is the glue used in products, such as 
particleboards, plywoods, fiberboards, etc. Most commonly, urea -formaldehyde (UF) glue is used, alone or 
reinforced with small quantities of melamine. The presence of residual glue  on the surface of the wood fibres or 
particles makes their recycling more difficult, especially for the production of new wood panels. The cro ss-linked 
glue particles do not react with a new adhesive to form a polymer network during a second cross -linking step, 
resulting in a significant drop in the properties of the materials formed from recycled panels. Moreover, the end of 
life of fiberboard panels (MDF, HDF, etc.) has become a major issue due to the occurrence of UF resin which prevents 
the energy recovery or the integration of fibers in particleboard, making these materials non-exploitable.  
W2W Innovation: The steam explosion process (Figure 1.5) will be 
used in combination with mycoremediation to remove substances of 
special concern such as biocides used in wood preservatives.  Wood 
waste will be screened for occurrence of preservatives and UF resins. 
Wood pieces containing hazardous substances (BR2 and C class) will 
be separated from those containing UF and coating (BR1) or free of 
additives (A class). Then the wood waste will b e ground into 8mm 
particles. A differential two steps process will then be setup according 
to the type of wood waste. #Fermentation and Fungal growth for  
Detoxification of hazardous wood: Wood waste belonging to BR2 and 
C classes will be firstly subjected to mycoremediation to remove 
hazardous substances. Two ways will be explored for  
mycoremediation: (a) Solid state fermentation, (b) Submerged fermentation. #(Physicochemical) steam explosion 
will be employed for the treatment of wood waste (post consumers panel board, hazardous wastes): In a second step, 
the fungal pre-treated wood will be treated by steam explosion to recover previously desorbed pollutants in the liquid 
phase. The resulting “cleaned” wood particles will then be integrated in new panel board production. #Detoxification 
of aqueous effluent (from steam explosion) and biological (fungi) processes: Detoxification of aqueous effluent from 
(SE) treatment performed on wood waste belonging to A and BR1 classes will be performed by submerged 
fermentation. Filamentous fungi, using hazardous substances as carbon source, will be utilised for the submerged 
fermentation process. Process optimisation and validation will take place. #Liquefaction of mixed Waste with organic 
catalysts: For cases where mixed waste cannot be separated, the production of polyols from the produced biomass 
will be exploited. Polyols will be synthesised using two approaches: liquefaction process and using ring -opening 
polymerisation. Liquefaction is thermochemical process carried out with a solvent, in acidic or alkaline media, with 
or without the presence of a catalyst at high temperatures. The most commonly employed solvents are polyhydric 
alcohols as polyethylene glycol, ethylene glycol and glycerol. Strong acids or bases are typically used as catalysts, 
especially sulfuric acid, which can reduce the temperature required for reaction.    
Obtained Secondary Raw Materials: As part of the pilot activities the developed system is expected to treat up to 
20kg/day producing: #1 Wood without Adhesives/Pollutants. Classified in Category A, that could be used for any 
alternative flow, and #2 Polyols from liquefaction.    
Product Validation and KPIs: The recovered wood fibers and particles will be characterised, while one-layer and 
three-layer particleboards will be produced and fully characterised regarding their internal bond strength, density, 
MOE, MOR and swelling. In addition, innovative lightweig ht panels with incorporated mycocomposites (with no 
VOC emissions) will be produced and then characterised in terms of internal bond strength, density, MOE, MOR 
and swelling. Finally, the obtained polyols will be used for the s ynthesis of non-isocyanate polyurethanes (NIPUs) 
adhesives through polycondensation reactions while the properties of obtained NIPUs will be also determined.  
Figure 1.5 
: 
  
Steam explosion  
process 
  
  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8305270 - 05/12/2023 
20  
  
Increase of secondary 
raw materials use  
Waste 
reduction  
GHG emissions 
reduction  
Up-cycling, reuse and upgrade secondary 
raw materials technologies implemented  
By-products 
value increase  
30%  30%  70%  3  >50%  
  
Use Case #3: Energy & Gas Valorisation Technologies for Contaminated Wood Waste  
This Use case relies on the conversion of liquid and solid waste from different industries (construction, paper, urban, 
etc.) into building blocks (CO2 and H2) for further production of valuable compounds (detergents) that can be used 
in other industry sectors. The liquid waste will be pre-treated through a novel technology, microwave hydrothermal 
carbonization (HTC -MW). During the HTC -MW treatment ( CIRCE), the carbon contented into the waste is 
densified producing hydrochar that has a higher heating capaci ty than the original feedstock. Furthermore, the 
hydrochar contains high dewaterability properties reducing the high energy demand steps to remove water from the 
liquid wastes. Hydrochar and dry solid waste will be used as feedstock for gasification (CIRCE) to produce H2 and 
CO2 (building blocks). CO2 and H2 will feed the novel Biotech reactor ( KIVERDI BV) in order to produce long 
chain carbon compounds (detergents) that are valuable in different industry sectors.  
Challenges to be Addressed: Contaminated wood containing hazardous substances cannot be recycled or disposed 
of in landfill, making energy recovery its primary use. Moreover, handling the large volume of by -products (e.g., 
ash, wastewater) from wood waste thermochemical conversion p rocesses remains a severe challenge from both 
environmental and economic perspective. Hydrothermal carbonisation is a well -known process for converting 
biomass into valuable products and is already commercialised mainly for sewage sludge treatment at the wastewater 
treatment plants 39. However, there is no evidence of the HTC application as part of another waste management 
process in a commercial scale. Wood waste is an interesting feedstock for the hydrothermal conversion due to its 
high content of carbon and low content of metals. The potential advantages of using HTC as a process to treat wood  
  
waste are: 1) The process water can be used for nutrient recovery and further biomethane production and, 2) The 
hydrochar can be used as a material to produce syngas.   
W2W Innovation : For contaminated 
wood waste, a valuable cascade process 
is suggested where hydrothermal 
carbonisation (HTC), gasification and 
anaerobic digestion technologies, along 
with up -cycling biotech process of 
gasification emissions (H2 and CO2) into 
dodecanol will taking place, as depicted 
in Figure 1.6. The hydrochar is a stable 
and carbon pure product that increases 
the quality of the syngas by reducing the 
production of undesired side gases (NOx, 
SOx, etc.) and reduces the formation of 
tars during the gasification process. The 
dodecanol production (for low impact 
detergents application) using as 
feedstock the syngas deriving from HTC 
can be used to close the cycle of contaminated wood valorisation. #Hydrothermal Carbonisation through MW will 
be employed at lab (TRL 4) and HTC reactor (TRL6): Mixed waste (contaminated wood waste and liquid waste e.g., 
sludge, MSW etc.) will undergo treatment through HTC at lab scale (TRL4) and validated in a TRL6 HTC reactor. 
A more advanced HTC process will be applied which will i nclude microwave (MW) heating bringing advantages 
such as (1) Fast and uniform heating; (2) Selective heating; (3) Treatment of non-homogeneous wastes; (4) Energy 
efficiency; (5) Overall cost effectiveness/savings; (6) Improved process control; and (7) Ability to operate from an 
electrical source in comparison with the conventional HTC treatment. Hydrochar and rich in nutrients and organics 
process water will be produced. #Gasification (TRL ≥ 6) of wood waste and hydrochar produced from HTC: Then, 
gasification of hydrochar produced from HTC will be employed at a reactor (TRL ≥ 6). #Anaerobic digestion from 
the process water from HTC: The process water from HTC treatment is a rich in organics liquid that can undergo 
 
39 S. A. Alavi-Borazjani, I. Capela, and L. A. C. Tarelho, “V alorization of biomass ash in biogas technology: Opportunities and challenges,” Energy Reports, vol. 6, pp. 472–476, 2020, 
doi: 10.1016/j.egyr.2019.09.010.  
Figure 1. 
6 
: 
 Energy & gas valorisation for contaminated wood waste process 
  
  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8305270 - 05/12/2023 
21  
  
throughout anaerobic digestion for biogas production with higher methane content. CIRCE will apply selected 
prediction models to estimate the biomethane production from the process waters generated from the HTC treatment 
based on their characterisation. #Biotech-driven up -cycling of syngas into dodecanol for low impact detergents 
application: KIV has developed a proprietary microbial conversion platform allowing the use of syngas (H2 and 
CO2) as feedstock production pathways. The process uses CO2 and H2, an inexpensive nitrogen source, and mineral 
nutrients, for dodecanol production. At first, genetic and analytical tools will be used to improve dodecanol 
production by reengineering fatty acid biosynthesis and fatty acid beta -oxidation. Metabolic modelling a nd 13oC 
metabolic flux analysis will be applied to support the enhancement of the microorganism strain (C.necator) towards 
the desired metabolic pathway. Following, tests at 20Lt gas fermentation scale (TRL4) using syngas simulating 
detailed composition provided by CIRCE, will take place. The progressively improved strains will be used during 
fermentation trials in order to achieve targeted productivity and titer. First samples (500gr- 1 Kg) of pure dodecanol 
and exhausted biomass cells will be provided to P&G for pre-validation. Then, feedback will be provided to CIRCE 
(from pre-validation process) regarding potential contaminants in the syngas which may determine productivity 
reduction. CIRCE and KIV will set -up the appropriate decontamination measures. The samples from TRL5 
campaign will be provided to P&G for preliminary feedback and characterisation (odour, colour, stability, impurities 
content, compatibility with other chemicals for detergents formulation, etc.) to provide feedback for fine tuning 
downstream process. Based on the obtained feedstock, during phase 2 the overall process (upstream and 
downstream) will be scaled up at 100 Lt using as feedstock bottles of syngas (H2 and CO2 the latter also deriving 
from CHP) from CIRCE process and leveraging the access from KIV R&D team to upstream and downstream 
facilities located in Spain. Samples from TRL6 tests (kg scale) will be then progressively validated into formulation 
of low impact detergents leveraging a micro falling film pilot reactor (TRL6) owned by P&G in its Brussels centre 
that allows to convert fatty alcohols in ionic -surfactants for specific application in detergency (e.g., laundry 
detergents, fabric enhancers and dishwashing liquid) including small scale consumer exposure tests for validating 
technical and safety performances. KIV will perform process adjustments through a feedback loop if necessary.    
Obtained Intermediate Products : #1 Hydrochar produced from HTC and being gasified for H 2 and CO 2 
production; and #2 H 2 & CO 2 produced from hydrochar gasification process + exhausted CO 2 from CHP being 
converted into dodecanol + protein rich biomass via low impact biotech route.   
Obtained End Products: #1 Chemical Detergents for different application sectors, and #2 Nutrients recovery from 
HTC i.e., recovery of ammonia from process water.  
Product Validation and KPIs: Productivity > 1.5g/lt h; titer of >50g/L; validation of purified syngas (CO2/H2) 
derived dodecanol and aminoacids from exhausted biomass into at least 2 detergents formulations proving: i) the 
fulfilment of technical and safety requirements (properties identical to those obtained from standard dodecanol; ii) 
environmental sustainability (GHG savings: 50% compared to fossil based dodecanol and 70% compared to 
dodecanol obtained from palm/coconut oils from outside EU equivalent to 1.5 ton of COeq saved/ton of dodecanol; 
capturing and utilisation of 2.85 ton CO2/ton dodecanol); iii) cost-competitiveness (price not higher than current 
price of standard dodecanol in the market).   
Increase of secondary 
raw materials use  
Waste 
reduction  
GHG emissions 
reduction  
Up-cycling, reuse and upgrade secondary 
raw materials technologies implemented  
By-products 
value increase  
50%  30%  70%  3  >50%  
1.2.4 Replication in Other Sectors  
W2W is setting the base of the cascade valorisation approach tackling resource usage with efficiency and higher 
value. W2W is mainly targeting the polluted wood from industrial and urban waste but in parallel is targeting a 
twofold replication strategy based on: i) Direct Technology Transfer in other sectors: W2W technologies shall be 
validated in wood originating from CDW and used furniture but can occur in the wood processing and pulp paper 
industries as well. In lower quantities, it may occur in all sect ors due to wood packaging or similar usages. These 
sectors can directly apply the whole proposed technologies. In addition, W2W offers novel approaches for the 
valorisation of ashes from CDW which can also be applied in ashes originating from any thermal o r combustion 
process having a direct impact in the majority of the P4P sectors. ii) Conceptual Replication of Cascading concept: 
A study of the proposed cascade framework shall be performed for the replication in other sectors, starting from the 
glass sector. All the developed digital tools shall have a generic approach offering the direct replication in additional 
sectors. The separate collection or sorting of glass in multiple classes, the automatic separation of them based on 
recyclability sectors shall be performed, offering the needed input for the glass replication scenario. Glass is not part 
of the current P4P partnership, but W2W aims to give the required incentives through a complete replicability study.   
  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8305270 - 05/12/2023 
22  
  
1.2.6 Positioning of W2W with Respect to Other Projects and Innovation Activities   
Relevant Objectives  Added Value in W2W  
DigInTrace (Horizon Europe), Jan 2023-Dec 2026 – ICCS (Project Coordinator), NTUA, CIRCE, IRIS  
Creation of a decentralised traceability platform 
with innovative tracking and sorting techniques, 
updated quality certification schemes, AI -based 
decision-making mechanisms.  
The outcomes will facilitate the creation of sophisticated 
separation and sorting systems and associated digital tools 
leveraging AI, resulting in efficient circular resource 
valorisation.  
CORALIS (H2020), Oct 2020-Sep 2024 – CIRCE (Project Coordinator), ICCS  
Pathways creation for resource decarbonisation 
in energy intensive sector through 
implementation of viable IS approaches.  
CIRCE and ICCS will use knowledge for circular resources 
valorisation, monitoring systems and IS data sharing and 
management.  
REDOL (Horizon Europe), Dec 2022-Nov 2026 – CIRCE (Project Coordinator), ICCS, IRIS   
Establishment of circularity hubs in urban areas 
with zero waste policies by optimising value 
chains with digital tools.  
Project findings will support the creation of effective values 
chains in relation to W2W developed technologies.   
WoodCircus (H2020), Nov 2018-Dec 2021 – VTT  
To promote wood -based value chains as part of 
circular bioeconomy.   
Results are findings from the project will be used towards the 
development of the cascade valorisation framework and the 
skills development strategy   
SHAREBOX (H2020), Sep 2015-Aug 2019 – IRIS   
Secure Management Platform for Shared Process 
Resources for flexible energy use and material 
flow integration.  
W2W will learn from the project experiences how the digital 
solutions can provide robust and reliable information in 
realtime to share resources  
ACCELWATER (H2020), Nov 2020-Oct 2024 – ICCS, NTUA  
Offers a holistic WaterEnergyFood nexus 
framework in food industries for more 
costeffective use of resources.  
NTUA is involved in protein recovery from waste and 
byproducts, and application development expanding it towards 
the new materials developed in W2W   
REHAP (H2020), Oct 2016-Mar 2021 – VTT  
Transformation of agro -forestry residues into 
new sustainable and eco -efficient derivatives 
through innovative cost -effective processes to 
demonstrate their potential use in several  
Project findings will be used towards methods development 
for further wood valorisation, and in building components 
evaluation. Additionally, the implementation of Life Cycle and 
Cost Assessment, and waste management strategy and  
  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]  
23  
  
products at an industrial level and their application 
in sectors like Construction.  
measures for future standardi Associated with document Ref. 
Ares(2023)8305270 - 05/12/2023sation will be used for the development 
of the W2W cascade valorisation framework.  
DIMAT (Horizon Europe), Jan 2023-Dec  2025 – CERTH (Project Coordinator), UPV, DRAXIS  
Digital Technologies for modelling, simulation 
and optimisation in the material value chain with 
data analysis services and visualisation 
techniques for improving quality,  sustainability, 
effectiveness, and competitiveness of materials.  
The DIMA T Cloud Materials Database structure will provide 
input to the W2W DPP. The DIMA T Materials Environmental 
and Cost Life Cycle Assessment will used as a basis for the 
W2W Life Cycle Sustainability Assessment Tool for Cascade 
Pathways.  
BASAJAUN (H2020 ), Oct 2019-Mar 2024 – FOCCHI  
Aims to demonstrate how wood construction 
chains can be optimsed to foster both rural 
development and urban transformation.  
The experience on optimising the façade system made of 
biobased composites to respond to market needs will be used 
in W2W.   
POP-MACHINA (H2020),  Jun 2019-May 2023 – CERTH, QPLAN  
To promote environmental sustainability and 
generate socio -economic benefits in European 
cities through the circular production paradigm.  
The W2W business models will utilise the experience gained 
through the accelerator programme for entrepreneurship 
support and development of POP-MACHINA.  
1.2.7 W2W Need for a Trans-disciplinary Approach Positioning   
To promote overall sustainability, new circular solutions for secondary materials and waste management, as well as 
the increased use of secondary resources in the process industry, the project must consider many different aspects, 
thus require the joint involvement of different scientific domains. W2W works in a strong inter-disciplinary field, as 
it involves expertise and methods from various disciplines including natural and applied disciplines, such as 
chemistry and chemical engineering, physics, ICT, data science, electrical and mechanical engineering together with 
social sciences, such as sociology, economics, political science, ethics, law, business, communications, training and 
learning, governance, etc. These are interwoven within the W2W activities and will be brought together and 
integrated in pursuit of the project objectives forming inter - and trans -disciplinary conditions, used to develop 
innovations in different fields, and support other activities related to policy influencing, certification, business case 
and learning programs for skills development. W2W will also actively pursue the involvement of all the actors in 
the value chain to consider the complex requirement of the specific markets in terms of standardisation, norms 
constraints, and performances. W2W recognises the difficulties of a trans-disciplinary collaboration (e.g., different 
language, terminology among different disciplines and methods of work, different levels of scientific understanding 
and cognitive structures etc.) and adopts a proactive approach towards them by planning to follow the fundamentals 
of the Methodology in Interdisciplinary Research framework40. At WP levels, the consortium will employ a quality 
assurance process (supported in WP1-3) to ensure that all trans-disciplinary aspects are integrated in the developed 
solutions, thus creating a meta -knowledge about all the different disciplines, methods  and epistemologies, and 
purposefully and reflectively integrate and synthesise different perspectives, to better understand and contribute to 
new processes for circularity of secondary materials.   
1.2.8 Integration of Social Sciences and Humanities (SSH)    
In the framework of its interdisciplinary approach, W2W will combine knowledge from SSH to explore how to better 
contribute to policy making, to enhance public understanding on clean, climate-neutral and resilient industrial value 
chains, how European governments and research institutes deal with diverse truth claims about the adverse effects 
of secondary materials and how to offer perspectives for innovation forms of action. There are many different 
opportunities on how to use technologies depending on hum an behaviour, needs and objectives and governance 
structures. W2W will study the special sectoral, social and regional needs and urgencies in the demo cases, the value 
chains and across different stakeholders upon creating the new solutions and the related  training activities and 
lifelong learning programmes. To boost innovations’ impact, the training and capacity building activities will be 
cocreated and codesigned since people can develop new ideas and innovations based on the new technologies and 
products; the process of co-creation will be based on the Responsible Research and Innovation (RRI) principles: i) 
anticipation increasing resilience with holistic approaches of expected social risks, gaps and potentials of recycle 
technologies and traceability; ii) reflexivity and continuous re-examination of positions, activities and assumptions; 
iii) inclusion giving space to currently unheard voices to mitigate concerns; and iv) responsiveness building 
capacities to adapt to changing technological and societal conditions.   
 
40 Tobi, H., Kampen, J.K. Research design: the methodology for interdisciplinary research framework. (2018).  https://doi.org/10.1007/s11135-017-0513-8   

  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8305270 - 05/12/2023 
24  
  
1.2.9 Gender Dimension in the R&I Content   
W2W will overcome sex and gender bias by disaggregating socioeconomic and biological differences between man, 
woman or other gender identities, contributing to a more inclusive research and innovation by integrating related 
activities inspired from gendere d innovations proposed by EC 29. Project management will be engaged to gender 
issues including them in the reporting period’s reports. To overcome gaps (considering both occupational and social  
  
status of genders) a draft study will be performed resulting in W2W Gender Equality Analysis with potential actions, 
as an integrated part of project activities. The study will be based on Gender Situation Analysis and Needs 
Assessment (GSANA, T1-3.3) to ensure gender-sensitive project objectives, results, activities, partners assessment, 
management, indicators for monitoring and resource allocation. The project’s motivation to perform these activities 
are both equality and the release of special creativity and abilities of all genders and individuals, creating added value 
for research, innovation and society. Proportionality and balance in research: equal participation of women, men 
and other genders at all project levels will be ensured, promoted already from the early stages of the project 
conceptualisation. All partners are encouraged to increase women's and other genders’ participation in activi ties 
including management, research, analysis, networking etc. to assure equal opportunities, recruitment and w orking 
arrangements. In addition, there is gender balance in the core project management activities and in the principal 
investigator per partner. All partners provide equal opportunities on employment and participation in research 
multinational projects. Scientific and linguistic bias : addressing in texts and material (e.g., personas) written in 
English will follow gender -neutral language, ensuring data, algorithms, digital tools, technologies and visuals are 
free of gender bias and stereotypes. In all stu dies and surveys, gender dimension will be considered. Focus groups 
dedicated to diversity and gender issues will be included in co -creation activities. Collection of gender statistics 
employing AI and use of related metadata is also encouraged to identify  challenges and include in policy -making, 
internal monitoring and to better understand gender-specific needs, issues and gaps. Annotating source data for sex 
and gender will be ensured. Special biological and other factors limiting or exposing to special d angers and 
genderspecific risk (e.g., specific professions and activities) will considered. Gender participation and real influence 
will be studied upon the operation and the decision -making in the governance structures of W2W as well as in the 
variety of entities and sectors involved. Equal projects’ results : W2W ensures that new solutions usage 
(technologies, business models, processes, digital tools, etc.), access to resources and services and the related 
trainings, foster the involvement of women and ot her gender identities scientists and engineers in the future 
landscape. Equal dissemination: dissemination (quotations, visibility in publications and patents), communication 
in general public though releases and press, industry and business stakeholders, policy recommendations and 
institutional regulations, business and project’s results should  be addressed to all genders equally and adjusted to 
their needs. Connection with established gender activities and expertise : W2W will seek connection with EU 
organisations and institutes, academia studying gender, national gender equality bodies etc. for knowledge sharing, 
participation in activities and provision of data and tracking in EU gender statistic database (EIGE), policy-making 
or studies. Existing tools w ill be considered to ensure the integration of gender analysis into the project such as 
gender specific questionnaires, checklists (i.e., Yellow Window, IGAR) guidelines and research methodologies. 
Gender equality promoting: W2W is rooted in industry environment, so it focuses on gender equality to be oriented 
on the participating partners making difference within their workspaces. To assure full integration of the gender 
dimension, a dedicated session will be shared in each demo site, where general topic k nowledge, all necessary 
information and guidelines (incl. gender-neutral language guidance) related to project will be held for the partners 
and possibly other participants at the beginning of the project. Partners will be encouraged and supported to 
implement their own gender equality plans, based on the knowledge gained during the project.   
1.2.10 Open Science Practices applied in the Project  
W2W will establish open science principles as an integral part of its methodology and its management, fully aligned 
with the ambition of the European Open Science Cloud as a trusted environment for hosting and processing research 
data to support EU science  in its global leading role; aligned to Open Innovation 2.0 paradigm and supporting the 
principle 'as open as possible’ in the goals of the Open Science Policy under Horizon Europe. Appropriate open 
science practices will be implemented supported by WP1 -3 in terms of coordination, monitoring and management 
and WP19-21 included in dissemination, communication replication, cooperation activities etc. Specifically, the 
contributions are expected to be: Research output management and impact to the industry : W2W research 
outputs will be made available to dedicated target groups (i.e., industrial, sectoral, recycle, product and material 
associations, industry and businesses, SMEs, scientific and research community, European and international 
associations and organisations (e.g., SPIRE, P4P, DGs, SPI, Orgalim, EIT RawMaterials) CEN & CENELEC, 
national standardisation bodies, etc.) aiming to allow the community to leverage from the project results and ensure 
replicability. Early and open sharing of research results and data : W2W aims to provide 3 case studies 
  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8305270 - 05/12/2023 
25  
  
publications in Open Research Europe, one for each of the value chains demonstrated. The first versions will be 
published upon completion of development phase and continuously updated till the end of project. Measures to 
ensure reproducibility of research outputs: The strong commitment for providing standardisation deliverables of 
secondary materials, the harmonisation of data as well as the decentralised based digital activities involving and 
coordinating different actors of the value chains with different information, will ensure that research outputs follow 
common standards and support mainstream and widespread reporting and documentation methodologies. Providing 
open access to research outputs and Participation in open peer-review: W2W consortium partners are committed 
to use the Open Research Europe scholarly fully open access publishing service for Horizon Europe to enable rapid 
publication times and publication outputs that support research integrity, reproducibility, transparen cy and enable 
open science practices. The project has dedicated part of its budget to cover the fees associated with open -access 
publication to facilitate dissemination and reuse of the project’s results. Project participants, for various reasons, may 
need to submit articles to j ournals (or proceedings) that only offer a lower level of open access, requiring either 
parallel publication or an embargo period. In this case, Green Open Access and Gold Open Access will be chosen 
depending on each publication. For green open access, dev elopers will deposit the final peer -reviewed manuscript 
in a public repository of their choice, ensuring open access to the publication within the embargo period of sixmonths 
maximum.   
1.2.11 Research Data Management in line with the FAIR Principles -AI robustness   
W2W is expected to collect data in the scope of the project activities and the value chains to assess the technologies 
and effectiveness of the proposed solutions in real life conditions of the supply chains. All the data made available 
directly by the par tners involved or research results like models, algorithms, scripts, code and analysis will be 
aggregated and anonymised according to their desired visibility and security level defined. As for experimental 
measurements and datasets (raw, processed, logs e tc.) regarding the materials and the products during the real 
demonstration of the value chains, will be anonymised, safe and secured in the Circular Wood Upcycling platform. 
The exact protocols and data types will be defined according to the specific needs in T4.4 and constantly monitored 
through T1-3.2. The necessity of publishing all the data generated in the project, if it does not affect exploitation of 
results or competitiveness, is aligned with ethic issues and protects the privacy of data. This, ali gned with Open 
science, W2W will make data not only “as open as possible: but also “as closed as necessary” to encourage 
collaboration across disciplines for solving today’s complex societal challenges. So, with respect in confidentiality, 
most of research  data generated by the project will be made open and will be offered to the Open Research Data 
Pilot (Open AIRE). W2W will generate research outputs and data which will be managed in line with the FAIR 
principles. Data and research results will be Findable: with open science research described, proper identifiers e.g., 
DOIs and standards used; Accessible: integrated to databases -created by initiatives such as these in 1.2.10 - and 
continuously expanding; Interoperable and Reusable: standardised, harmonised using common vocabularies, open 
standards and sharing principles to be easily adjusted and used in further research in several fields. Open science 
guidelines and exact data management plan will be created by M06 as part of D1.1,  constantly updated (D2.1 and 
D3.1). The data within project’s workspace will be maintained after the conclusion of the project for at least 2 years, 
so that the knowledge management will abide by the principles of discoverability, accessibility, intelligibility and 
availability also beyond the end of the project.    
  
All the AI-based solutions will be of limited risk based on the EC’s AI risk classification and regulatory framework41, 
as they don’t involve any critical infrastructure or activity such as health, employment, public services, fundamental 
rights, justice, law etc. Thus, they cannot cause harm of any kind to humans, they can only support decision making 
for the improvement of their safety (e.g., better mapping of DPPs or LCA results). Their purposes are strongly related 
to sustainability and they are operated by related scientists who understand their processes, thus they duly consider 
the context and their economic and social impact. All AI components will be continuously monitored and maintained 
to ensure that models achieve the expected accuracy and are regularly re -trained, while the relevant infrastructure 
meets the highest security standards (and is regularly updated) and access to the system is secured through a 
rolebased authorization protocol. W2W will take all appropriate measures to ensure security, accuracy, reliability, 
fallback plans and reproducibility. All security aspects and expectations regarding accuracy w ill be properly and 
regularly communicated with the end users.   
  
1.2.12 The “Do not Significant Harm” (DNSH) Principle    
W2W will ensure that it is fully compliant with the DNSH Principle since its activities as well as the expected life 
cycle impact of the innovations at a commercialisation stage, substantially contribute in a positive way and/or do not 
 
41 https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/regulatory-framework-ai  
  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8305270 - 05/12/2023 
26  
  
significantly harm any of the six environmental objectives set out in Art. 9 and 17 of the EU Sustainable Finance 
Taxonomy Regulation (EU) 2020/852. W2W will apply a life -cycle oriented approach (validated through the 
utilisation of relevant LCA tool when possible) to ensure that proposed solutions are sustainable and consisting of 3 
steps: i) Identification of actual and potential adverse impacts during the life cycle of the project activities; ii) 
Prevention or mitigation of adverse impacts; and iii) Accounting for how adverse impacts are addressed by tracking 
performance and communicating results. This also applies for the proposed ICT technologies which will be validated 
with Green ICT principles. W2W activities are expected to have a direct positive  impact to the environmental 
objectives defined: Climate Change Mitigation by reducing GHG emissions (use Recommendation 2013/179/EU or 
ETSI ES 203 199, ISO 14067:2018 or ISO 14064-2:2019 to calculate lifecycle GHG and net emissions), to pollution 
prevention and control through waste reduction, and identifying harmless substances and contaminants in each case, 
to transition to Circular Economy through the establishment of symbiotic and circular flows within same or different  
  
industries for materials and wastes, whereas is not expected any negative impact to the sustainable use and protection 
of water and marine resources, protection and restoration of biodiversity and the Climate Change adaptation.   
2 Impact #@IMP-ACT-IA@#
2.1 W2W’s Pathways towards Impact   
In this section, an overview is provided on how the W2W results generate Outcomes (Section 2.1.1) and Wider 
Impacts (Section 2.1.2). The target groups and the impact created by the W2W are presented in Table 2.1, whereas 
the W2W KERs per innovation pillar are listed in Table 2.2, for the reader’s convenience.   
Table 2.1: W2W target groups and impact created  
Target Groups  Impact Created by W2W  
A: Process industry companies , including 
those involved in the production of 
woodbased products and combustion 
processes  
New opportunities to use secondary resources, which can increase 
resource efficiency and reduce CO2 emissions; Development of 
new, more sustainable products and processes.  
B: Recycling companies  involved in the 
collection, sorting and processing of 
secondary raw materials  
New business opportunities and revenue streams, particularly for 
SMEs; Expansion of their operations by providing a new source of 
feedstock.  
C: Manufacturers  of new products made 
from secondary raw materials  
New sources of feedstock to develop new products; Diversify 
product portfolio and develop more sustainable products.  
D: Public authorities responsible for waste 
management and environmental protection  
Help to achieve their environmental and sustainability goals, such 
as reducing waste sent to landfill and CO2 emissions.  
E: Standardisation organisations developing 
standards for the use of secondary raw 
materials in the process industry  
Contribution to the development of new standards and guidelines 
for the use of secondary resources in the process industry.  
F: Research and academic institutions  
working on technologies and approaches for 
the upcycling of secondary raw materials  
Access to new knowledge and insights related to the use of 
secondary resources in the process industry, upcycling, and 
circular economy.  
G: Workers and employees  in the process 
industry and recycling sectors  
New training and skills development opportunities which can 
improve their employability.   
H: End -users and consumers  of products 
made from secondary raw materials  
More sustainable products and processes, which can help to reduce 
the environmental impact of production and consumption.  
I: The broader society and environment  Reduced waste and pollution, increased resource efficiency.   
Table 2.2: W2W KERs for each innovation pillar   
Pillar 1: Advanced Separation and Sorting Technologies  
KER1: Optimal wood size particles for cascade valorisation; KER2: Cascade valorisation thresholds-led sorting 
system; KER3: Optimised separation enabled by Human-Robot Collaboration and MR technologies.  
  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8305270 - 05/12/2023 
27  
  
Pillar 2: Upcycling Processes and Technologies  
KER4: Wood Cascade to function; KER5: Wood composites for wallboards; KER6: Wood glue separation; 
KER7: Bioremediation wood treatment; KER8: Mixed wood liquefaction; KER9: Hydrothermal Carbonisation; 
KER10: Biotech-driven up-cycling of syngas into dodecanol; KER11: Ashes valorisation.  
Pillar 3: Digital Tools for Improving Circular Flows of Secondary Materials  
KER12: Life Cycle Sustainability Assessment Tool for Cascade Pathways; KER13: Material V olume Estimation; 
KER14: Dynamic DPP; KER15: Supply Chain management tool for the optimisation of upcycling of secondary 
materials; KER16: Integrated Circular Wood Upcycling Platform.  
Pillar 4: Supportive Framework in Policy, Market, and Skills  
KER17: W2W Stakeholders Network; KER18: Classification Framework for recycled wood; KER19: Wood 
cascade data sharing model; KER20: Training Programs for Upcycling, Replication, and Cooperation based on 
collaborative Design; KER21: Synergies hub for circularity; KER22: Circularity / Upcycling framework for 
cascade valorisation; KER23: Contribution to standardisation and certification; KER24: Business models.  
2.1.1 Contribution of W2W towards Achieving the Expected Outcomes of the Target Topic   
Expected Outcome 1: “Prove the technical and economic feasibility of the use of secondary resources in the 
process industry leading to products with identical properties and performances as those produced using 
primary resources and allowing production without quality restriction.”  
Pathway to impact:  The application of the novel W2W technologies (W2W Pillar 1 & 2) will process 
woodcontaining waste to produce wood without pollutants, biocomposite building materials, biopolymers, 
polyols, and chemical detergents. These end products will be analysed in collaboration with the process industry 
(Tasks T7- 
  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]  
28  
  
8.4, T9-10.4, T11-12.5) to determine their characteristics for meeting quality specifications. In particular, for Associated 
with document Ref. Ares(2023)8305270 - 05/12/2023 
composite building materials: thermal performance, fire resistance, mechanical strength, sound insulation; for 
particleboards: internal bond strength, MOE, MOR, swelling, density profiles; for dodecanol: stability, colour, 
odour, safety. The compliance with regulatory and market requirements will also be assessed, to ensure that they 
can effectively replace products produced using primary resources.  
KERs: KER1-KER11, Target Groups: A, B, C, D, F, H, I  
Expected Outcomes KPIs  Target  
KPI1.1 Increase in efficiency of successful wood material classification  90%  
KPI1.2 Improvement in latency of the human-robot collaboration execution   80%  
KPI1.3 Improvement in overall efficiency and productivity of the separation process  80%  
KPI1.4 Increase in amount of Class B and Class C wood waste recovered and used to produce 
composite building materials and panels   30%  
KPI1.5 Validation of purified syngas-derived dodecanol and aminoacids   >2 detergents  
KPI1.6 Increase in the suitability of wood fibers derived from wood waste for use in end 
products  
30%  
KPI1.7 Increase in the efficiency of the removal of urea-formaldehyde (UF) from waste wood   50%  
Significance: Proportion of the process industry 
that adopts the use of secondary resources in their 
production processes: 30%  
Scale: Number of end product types produced through the use 
of secondary resources with identical properties and 
performance as those produced using primary resources: 5  
  
Expected Outcome 2: “Increase the use of secondary resources in the process industry leading to significant 
increase in resource efficiency across the value chain and subsequent reduction of CO2 emissions; reduction 
of waste sent to landfill and overall positive environmental impact.”  
Pathway to impact: The disposal of waste wood in landfills creates methane, a potent greenhouse gas, with each 
tonne of wood in landfill creating the equivalent of 800kg of CO2 in methane emissions 42. The incineration of 
waste wood recovers energy from the resource. In fact, woody biomass is classified as ‘renewable energy’ in the 
EU. However, there is criticism that it is having the opposite effect to that expected of renewable energy, by 
increasing atmospheric levels of carbon dioxide for substantial periods of time 43. By applying the novel W2W 
technologies (Pillar 1 & 2) and demonstrating the successful upcycling of wood in 3 Use Cases, the project will 
extend the lifetime of wood in C&D and furniture waste and achieve a reduced demand for virgin wood, thereby 
preventing deforestation and promoting circularity in the wood value chain. Additionally, by reducing the amount 
of wood waste sent to landfill or incineration, the project can help prevent the release of greenhouse gases and 
other harmful substances into the environment.    
KERs: KER1-KER11, Target Groups: A, B, C, D, F, H, I  
Expected Outcomes KPIs  Target  
KPI2.1 Reduction of wood-containing waste sent to landfill or incineration   30%  
KPI2.2 % increase in lignin and cellulose fibers recovered from waste wood   50%  
Scale: increase in the use of 
recovered wood: 30%  
Significance: Reduction in CO2 emissions resulting from diversion of wood waste 
from landfills or incineration (20%,70%,70% for Use Case 1,2, and 3, respectively)  
  
Expected Outcome 3: “Increase the competitiveness of the European process industry; new business 
opportunities and revenue flows for recycling companies, benefiting particularly SMEs, which dominate 
this sector of the market.”  
 
42 https://communitywoodrecycling.org.uk/what-we-do/our-environmental-impact/   
43 Norton, M, Baldi, A, Buda, V , et al. Serious mismatches continue between science and policy in forest bioenergy. GCB Bioenergy. 2019; 11: 1256– 1263.  
https://doi.org/10.1111/gcbb.12643   

  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]  
29  
  
Pathway to impact:  The market analysis and the co -designed business models developed in W2W with 
prospective customers and stakeholders participating in the Use Case activities will maximise the business 
opportunities and revenue streams for recycling companies, particularly SMEs, which can utilise secondary 
resources for manufacturing new projects in a sustainable and cost -effective manner, and reduce the cost of raw 
materials, thus increasing their competitiveness in the market. The development of new and innovative upcycling 
technologies will create a competitive advantage for the European process industry, attracting new customers and 
driving growth in the sector. In addition, the contribution of W2W to the development of new standards will bring 
the project technologies closer to the market and spread technological advances.   
KERs: KER17 – KER24, Target Groups: A, B, C, D, G  
Expected Outcomes KPIs  Target  
  
  
Expected Outcome 4: “The proposed technologies should contribute to the matching of supply -
versusdemand of feedstock at the level of quality constraints (removal of impurities or wrong matrices, 
concentration etc.).”  
Pathway to impact: The novel W2W technologies (W2W Pillar 1 & 2) will enable the conversion of recovered 
wood (Grade B &C) to Grade A wood, which has an appropriate quality that can match the demand of feedstock 
in the process industry. In addition, the Digital Product Pass port and the Supply Chain management tool will 
enhance the traceability and transparency of the recovered wood in the value chain, thus improving the matching 
of supply and demand of feedstock. The project use cases will providing a comprehensive assessment of the quality 
constraints and the potential of the secondary resources, which can facilitate the decision-making process for both 
the suppliers and the process industry.  
KERs: KER1-11, KER14, KER15, Target Groups: A, B, C  
Expected Outcomes KPIs  Target  
KPI4.1 Number of companies implementing the DPP   40  
KPI4.2 Reduction of transport costs   20%  
Scale:  
Number of end product quality properties validated in Use Case 1: 4  
Number of end product quality properties validated in Use Case 2: 5  
Number of end product quality properties validated in Use Case 3: 4  
Significance: increase in the availability 
of Grade A wood feedstock in the process 
industry compared to the baseline prior to 
the project: 20%  
  
Expected Outcome 5: “Foster data sharing, and FAIR digital assets principles, considering the application 
of digital product passport between recycling companies and the process industry to improve the economy 
of scale in upcycling of material streams.”  
KPI3.1 Number of companies and organisations participating in the Synergies hub for circularity Associated with document 
Ref. Ares(2023)8305270 - 05/12/2023   
100  
KPI3.2 Number of companies and organisations adopting the W2W classification framework   25  
KPI3.3 Number of companies and organisations using the W2W data sharing model   40  
KPI3.4 Number of collaborations established through the W2W stakeholder network   30  
KPI3.5 Increased revenue of recycling companies which adopt the W2W framework   15%  
KPI3.6 Increased number of jobs in the process industry and recycling sector due to the increased 
use of upcycling technologies   5%  
Scale: Number of exploitable technologies/methods 
generated from the project: 16 (KERs 1 – 16)  
Number of new standards taking into consideration 
the results of W2W: 2   
Significance: New partnerships and collaborations 
between process industry and recycling companies: 70  
Number of publications, conference presentations, and 
other forms of dissemination of project results: 30   

  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]  
30  
  
Pathway to impact:  The project Digital Product Passport will enable data sharing and collaboration among 
stakeholders in the value chain and ensure that businesses along the value chain (manufacturers, importers and 
distributors, dealers, repairers, remanufacturers and recyclers) can access information that is valuable in their work 
to improve environmental performance, prolong product lifetime, boost efficiency and the use of secondary raw 
materials, thus lowering the need for primary natural resources, saving costs and reducing strategic dependencies. 
The improved efficiency and traceability of material streams will lead to improved economy of scale in upcycling, 
reduce waste and environmental impact, and increase the competitiveness of the European process industry.  
KERs: KER14, KER16, KER19, Target Groups: A, B, C, H  
Expected Outcomes KPIs  Target  
KPI5.1 Number of products with DPP information available   10  
KPI5.2 Number of product information management processes   15  
Scale:    
Number of businesses using the Digital Product 
Passport to access information on environmental 
performance, product lifetime, efficiency, and  
secondary raw materials use: 50   
Significance: Improvement in the accuracy and 
reliability of data shared through the digital product 
passport system: 90%;   
Increase in the efficiency and traceability of material 
streams within the value chain: 85%  
  
Expected Outcome 6: “Increase the use of unused and new skills to unfold the potential of the technological 
solutions at the workplace for upcycling and contribution to inclusive growth.”  
Pathway to impact: The project training material and capacity building activities will ensure that workers possess 
the necessary skillset to support the uptake and deployment of the innovative products, services, and processes.  
By doing so, the project will contribute to closing skill gaps in the relevant sectors and occupational groups, Associated 
with document Ref. Ares(2023)8305270 - 05/12/2023 
leading to improvements in employment and social levels across Europe. W2W will also promote knowledge 
sharing and collaboration among stakeholders in the value chain, to create a supportive and inclusive environment 
for the adoption of new skills and technologies. Finally, the project can contribute to inclusive growth by engaging 
with local communities and promoting the social and environmental benefits of upcycling, such as reduced waste, 
lower emissions, and improved resource efficiency.  
KERs: KER20, Target Groups: A, B, C, G, I  
Expected Outcomes KPIs  Target  
KPI6.1 Number of workers trained in new skills relevant to upcycling and circular economy principles   100  
KPI6.2 Number of companies implementing new technologies and processes related to upcycling   20  
KPI6.3 Number of skills gaps closed    5  
Scale:  Improved productivity and efficiency 
in the workplace as a result of the adoption of 
new upcycling technologies: 30%    
Significance:  Enhanced social and economic inclusion by 
providing training and employment opportunities for 
underrepresented groups such as youth, women, and 
disadvantaged populations.   
  
Expected Outcome 7: “At a longer term, to pave the way toward sustainable -by-design for circular 
products.”  

  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]  
31  
  
Pathway to impact:  The W2W framework life -cycle thinking approach, and its Life Cycle Sustainability 
Assessment Tool for Cascade Pathways will enable comparison between different options for the manufacturing 
of wood-containing products or the efficient use of by-products from wood refining, highlighting trade-offs. This 
will enable a holistic assessment of the implications of a product life cycle, including environmental, social, and 
economic aspects, paving the way towards sustainable-by-design circular products, which are designed from the 
outset with circularity in mind, so that they can be easily recycled or upcycled at the end of their life. This involves 
not only the design of the product itself but also the selection of materials and the development of new production 
processes that minimise waste and maximise resource efficiency. The project can also contribute to this outcome 
by the development of new business models which incentivise the reuse and recycling of products. The project 
will also work with policy- and decision-makers and industry stakeholders in order to create an enabling regulatory 
and market environment for circular and secondary products, and to promote the adoption of sustainable-by-design 
principles across the whole value chain.   
KERs: KER12, KER17-24, Target Groups: All target groups (A-I)  
Expected Outcomes KPIs  Target  
KPI7.1 Number of companies adopting sustainable-by-design circular product principles as a result 
of the project   
10  
KPI7.2 % reduction in environmental impact of products compared to their linear counterparts   70%  
Scale: Number of circular products 
designed and developed as a result of the 
project: 3    
Significance: Reduction in the environmental impact of products 
over their life cycle, as measured by the project's Life Cycle 
Sustainability Assessment Tool for Cascade Pathways   
2.1.2 Contribution of W2W towards Achieving Long-term Expected Impacts in the Destination   
Expected Impact: “Global leadership in clean, climate-neutral and resilient industrial value chains, circular 
economy and climate-neutral and human-centric digital systems and infrastructures.”  
W2W project is fully aligned with the topic and significantly contributes to the current EU policy framework and 
goals. Aiming towards the development of Key Enabling Technologies for the Process Industries and their 
validation, W2W fully supports the goal of the EU Climate Neutrality, for which digital, low -carbon and circular 
industry is one of the core aspects, as set by the Green Deal. W2W project is thus fully aligned with the key 
objectives of this destination, contributing to making Europe the first digitally led circular, climate -neutral and 
sustainable economy, having a direct contribution to the transformation of its construction and production systems 
and indirectly supporting the energy transformation through the technologies of ashes combustion valorisation. 
Innovative products and technologies exploitation strategies, business cases, innovative financial solutions for 
circular economy, educational services for employees based on co -designed resources and certification and 
standardization schemes of secondary raw materials, novel products and technologies, that will be integrated into 
digital tools will be a coherent part of W2W activities. A new paradigm for valorisation of secondary resources is 
introduced offering a wider replication potential in a series of sectors.   
Topics Serving the Objectives of the Destination and relevant to W2W Project   
Manufacturing Industry: W2W is aiming to support manufacturing of circular, carbonAssociated with document Ref. 
Ares(2023)8305270 - 05/12/2023-neutral and regenerative  
wood-based products by increasing the recovery value of recycled wood. The advanced separation and sorting 
machines, in various scales can be adjusted to the needs of specific manufacturing lines contributing the 
Industry5.0 principles of Robot Human collaboration towards a smart value network. The developed digital tools 
are integrated in a common platform as a service, allowing the optimisation of value chains in line with the 
Manufacturing as a service concept.   
A new way to build, accelerating disruptive change in construction:  W2W aims to improve the resource 
efficiency in the construction sector by improving the separation and sorting of CDW, supporting the pressure in 
the post pandemic period to repair and maintenance. A complete framework for circular CDW collection, 
separation, vaporisation is considered with the participation of the private and public sector, in line with the needs 
of SMEs that are dominating the recycling of CDW market. New materials and products are offered which can be 
used for newly build or repairing activities.   

  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]  
32  
  
Energy efficient and climate neutral process industries: W2W will contribute to increase the sustainability and 
resilience of the whole recycled wood value chain, including resource and energy intensive industries. They will 
be benefited by the increasing amount of waste material reintroduced into the production cycle, which will enable 
the creation of circular value chains for the targeted streams. Additionally, the technologies developed by W2W 
will be designed to contribute to a lower environmental impact, introducing a cascade in function, cascade in value 
and cascade in time new paradigm approach.   
Circularity and Zero Pollution in process industries:  The core of the project activities is the valorisation of 
CDW and close the production loop; That being said, the results from W2W will directly contribute towards the 
optimisation of resources, keeping resources in the loop and overall reducing landfilling in the whole value chain.  
Hubs for Circularity (H4C): W2W is developing a Supportive Framework in Policy, Market, and Skills which 
will be further elaborated in line with the advancements of the H4C through the participating members in the P4P 
(ICCS, CIRCE) as well as the related projects. The produced valorisation framework will also be evaluated by 
the ongoing projects of H4C, starting with the relevant objectives of REDOL project.   
Significance: To establish a secondary resource optimisation framework of recycled wood covering all the 
needed enabling technologies, validated at TRL6 at the end of the project and at TRL9 by 2030.  The W2W 
comprehensive approach for multi-dimensional cascade valorisation of wood from C&D and furniture waste will 
deliver a set of advanced waste management and upcycling technologies (TRL6), digital tools, and a supportive 
framework in policy, market and skills for establishing circular, sustainable value chains of recovered wood. During 
the project, these technologies and methods will be demonstrated with the active participation of feedstock 
suppliers, technology providers, and end users in 3 use cases. The wide dissemination of these technologies and 
methods through appropriate networks and their exploitation will set the stage for continued activities, and 
replication of the results in other sectors and regions (in and outside of the EU) after the project is over. To have a 
long-term impact, after the end of the project it will be required to scale up the technologies developed to an 
industrial level (TRL9) and demonstrate their commercial viability through partnerships with key industry players, 
investment in infrastructure, and support from policymakers. Ultimately, W2W will accelerate the transition from 
the take-make-dispose linear system to a more sustainable closed-loop system that upcycles secondary resources to 
reduce waste and create new value.   
Quantification of Long-term Impact  
Baseline: ● At European level, the CDWW deriving from all 28 EU countries is approximately 50.2 million tons 
(MT), with 2018 as a reference year. ● The average recycling rate in the EU is 46%: 23,1Mt of wood. ● When 
wood rots it creates methane, a potent greenhouse gas, with each tonne of wood in landfill creating the equivalent 
of 800kg of CO2 in methane emissions. ● Recycled wood is up to 40% cheaper than fresh wood.  
Assumptions: ○ W2W technologies result in an additional 30% of wood recycled: 6,9Mt; ○ 80% of wood waste 
treated by W2W technologies is estimated to be Class B, C, D. Of this, 20% is converted to Class A; ○ The 
remaining 20% is valorised for energy and CO2/H2.  
Estimated Long-term W2W impact: ♦ Approximately 7Mt of CDWW will be diverted from landfill and will be 
exploited for material valorisation; ♦ W2W results in avoided emissions from landfilling: 5,542Mt of CO2eq/tonnes 
of wood waste/year.   
Replication to other sectors potential Impact : The replication of W2W technologies in the pulp and paper 
industry can contribute to reducing emissions in this sector, which are estimated50 at: direct (32 MtCO2e in 2018) 
and indirect (9.98 MtCO2e in 2018). The technology for the valorisation of ashes from CDW can also be applied 
in ashes originating from any thermal or combustion process; these amount at 118 Mt51.  
  
50 https://www.cepi.org/statistics/   
51 2016 data, using Eurostat’s env_wasgen database  
  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8305270 - 05/12/2023 
33  
  
2.1.3 Barriers, Obstacles and Conditions that Determine Impact’s Success  
Technology and Process Barriers: Managing the complexity of value chains, products, materials, substances and 
different technologies is a great challenge creating individual barriers related to W2W technologies and processes. 
Additional barriers can include lack of data on waste resources , uncertainties of novel technologies, high cost of 
infrastructures for the replication of solutions, and difficulty in assessing the overall environmental impact.   
Mitigating measures: W2W intends to involve all the actors of supply chain, from suppliers of primary materials to 
producers and recyclers, to achieve a coherent and holistic solution, supported by proper managerial and coordination 
structures and procedures. All needs, technical capacities and knowhow of companies across supply chains will be 
combined, and the diversity of profiles of supply chain actors will be considered from the very beginning of the 
development. The high scientific and technical expertise and experience of the consortium is expected to contribute 
to the mitigation of the possible barriers in line with general sustainability, resilience, circular economy and DNSH 
principles. The developed digital tools for dynamic assessment will also allow a better and cost-efficient management 
of all the potential solutions decreasing the retrofitting impact of the value chain.   
Societal and Public Acceptance Barrier: Potential barriers related to public acceptance of novel technologies and 
methodologies might be related to lack of awareness, lack of digital skills, and scepticism on using recycled materials.  
Mitigating measures: Dissemination and communication activities will ensure the promotion of the benefits, results, 
best practice and performances obtained, providing training, educational activities and awareness and engagement 
raising though their co-creation. Means such as tutorials, webinars, workshops, or tools will be explored. The project 
will aim to engage the industrial community by interacting and networking with industry and workers associations. 
Mitigation of possible poor acceptance will be further supported by W2W  standardisation system as a tool for 
dissemination of the project results and interaction with the market stakeholders.  
Legal and Regulatory Barriers: W2W involves different activities related to recycled wood treatment coming from 
various sectors and applying novel, not yet standardized technologies. As a result, there are multiple and overlapping 
regulations that have to be taken into consideration. T hose regulations might often be conflicting, inconsistent or 
unclear. Additionally, in some cases, national strategies might not be aligned with the relevant European documents, 
contributing with different materials classifica tions or waste management institutional obligations (e.g., local 
mandatory management). Also, the evolution of EU standards and regulations is expected to be more restrictive and 
to set highly demanding implementation targets. (e.g., on quality or in the presence of unknown dangerous substances 
that are no longer allowed). All these may cause obstacles to adopt innovations and best practices or obtain approvals 
for project activities.  
Mitigating measures: W2W will collect, analyse, follow and plan its actions accordingly with all the related EU 
strategies already referred and regulations (e.g., Waste Framework Directive 2008/98/EC, Regulation No 1013/2006 
of end -of-waste criteria, Ecodesign Directive 2009/1 25/EC, GDPR, IRP protection, Cybersecurity directives 
2016/1148/EC, 2019/881/EC etc.), national laws and regional/local particular practices and institutions’ regulations. 
The W2W consortium consists of a multi -disciplinary group of partners, including digital and industrial expertise, 
standardisation and certification bodies, all with wide experience and knowledge on the above practices and 
regulations that will ensure the required effort. Finally, the project will aim to engage member States representatives 
involved at local level to properly address the challenges by interacting and networking with the relevant ministries, 
regional and local authorities, and associations, assuring the mitigation of legal and institutional barriers.   
Increased Prices of Recycled Materials: Potential barriers related to increased prices of the recycled materials may 
appear as the offer vs demand of materials should be fully adjusted to the new proposed paradigm. Industry 
acceptance might be also affected by the feedstock availability and price stability, as well as occurrence of competing 
materials. Potential high costs for collection, sensing, sorting, upgrade and recycling processes and infrastructure of 
multiple technologies compilation might affect the final price of products posing a barrier of wider implementation 
of project’s solutions.  
Mitigating measures: W2W will encourage collaboration and coordination among stakeholders in the value chain, 
promoting the sharing of knowledge, resources and infrastructure, and the development of common standards, 
helping to incrase efficiency and reduce costs. The increase  in public awareness of the environmental benefits of 
recycling and the importance of using recycled products, can help to create a more stable market for recycled 
materials and reduce price volatility.
2.2 Measures to Maximise Impact #@COM-DIS-VIS-CDV@#  
To achieve its stepwise methodology, the W2W consortium will utilise a concrete D&C plan together with an 
exploitation/commercialisation plan, taking advantage of the in -project user community and external stakeholders. 
2.2.1 Dissemination, Communication and Exploitation Plan  
  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8305270 - 05/12/2023 
34  
  
W2W Dissemination Strategy   
While focused on Awareness, Interest, Desire and Action (AIDA) activities, the project's dissemination measures will 
follow a multi -actor, multi -step and multi -channel approach. Table 2.3 identifies the target audiences, specific 
dissemination objectives a nd target values, tailored to the needs and profile of each target audience. Table 2.3: 
Dissemination Plan – Measures, Target Audience and Target Values  
Scientific 
Publications  
Principal Decision Influencers, Decision -Making Actors, Industry Associations, 
Environmental Agencies, Academia and Researchers, and Relevant Consortiums.  
Scientific Conferences (examples) : Eur. Conference of Waste Management (ECWM) , Digital Recycling  
Conference for Circular Economy, Sustainability, and Waste Management (eREC) , Eur. Conference on Wood  
Modification (ECWM), Int. Conference on Wood Biology and Wood Technology , Eur. Conference on Process  
Safety and Big Data, Int. Conference on Sustainable Solid Waste Management, Materials Science and Technology 
in Europe, International Conference on Waste Recycling and Management, etc.  
Peer-Review Open -Access Journal (preselected) : Recycling, Waste Management & Research , Polymer, 
Sustainability, Waste Management, Journal of Material Cycles and Waste Management , Wood Science and  
Technology, Resources Conservation and Recycling, etc.  
Target Values: Publishing in Peer-reviewed Journals: > 15; Presenting in Scientific Conferences: > 20.  
Technical 
Publications  
European Commission Relevant Offices, European Environment Agency, Public and 
Private Actors, ICT SMEs and large Enterprises, Formulators, Recyclers.  
W2W will publish and contribute to technical blog posts, articles, position/white papers, books, or any other 
reference from technology suppliers (bottom -up), in addition to references linked to the application scenario 
domains under consideration. The for thcoming issues of Institute of Environment and Development Blog  and 
Spire database of the outputs from projects of SPIRE portfolio are excellent instances of this type of work.  
Target Values: Publishing Technical Publications: > 25; Participation in Industrial Exhibitions with Booths: > 9  
Source Code 
Repository  
Ecosystem of Open-Source Developers, Incubators, Associations and Digital Innovation Hubs, 
Data Spaces for circular material use, ICT SMEs, Researchers, relevant Consortia.  
Stimulating a transparent and open -source culture, W2W will make widely available its software repositories 
through well-known distributed source code platforms such as GitHub and Bitbucket.  
Target Values: Publicly Available Deliverables: > 15; Source code: publish to >2 different repositories.  
Q & A Platform  Public Authorities, Associations, Open-source Developers, NGOs, SMEs, relevant Hubs.  
Discussions regarding the project repository will be centered around reference sites. The designated Q&A 
platform, developed as an integral part of the project website, will be Stack Overflow - the most extensive and 
reputable online community for developers to exchange knowledge and acquire new insights.  
Target Values: No. of Scientific Conversations to Participate/Contribute: > 20.  
Workshops and 
Trainings  
Industrial Organisations, SPIRE Associations, Public Authorities, Potential Investors, 
Funding Organisations, ICT SMEs, Academia and research Organisations.  
Particular emphasis will be placed on collaboratively designing training activities and lifelong learning programs 
to ensure that W2W actively contributes to skills development and standardisation, as outlined in WP17-19.  
Target Values: Technical Workshops: > 10; Online Training Tutorials: > 8; Webinars: > 12.  
Joint Activities with 
relevant Initiatives  
All Stakeholders with special focus on secondary resources in process industry, 
Policymaking Actors, Key Environmental Influencing Organisations, relevant Public 
Bodies.  
To further amplify and maximise the impact and outreach of the project’s results and to feed them into related 
international work streams, joint dissemination activities will be contracted. W2W will seek out opportunities to 
collaborate with other relevant projects and initiatives within Europe and beyond, and will organise and participate 
in events that promote knowledge sharing, as outlined in T19-21.2 and T19-21.3.  
Target Values: Symposiums/Fairs to Participate: > 9; Banners in each event: > 3; Procures to be distributed: > 300.  
Standards and Policy 
Contribution  
Standards Developing Organisations, Certification Committees, Open -Source 
Communities, Policy Makers, Relevant Public Bodies, Local Agencies.  
  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8305270 - 05/12/2023 
35  
  
W2W aims to support the standardisation of secondary material upcycling technologies. Collaborative efforts with 
relevant Technical Committees will be established to ensure seamless integration into current and future 
standardisation initiatives. The project's contributions will be incorporated into new or revised standards via one 
of the following channels: i) sharing information with Technical Committees, ii) facilitating mutual knowledge 
exchange, iii) submitting technical proposals, and iv) promoting the creation of new standard documents, based 
on the maturity of the specific solution, as outlined in T16-18.3 and T16-18.4.   
Target Values: Standards Contribution (new or revised): ≥ 3; Policy Briefs: > 2.  
W2W Communication Strategy   
The following design elements will be used to strengthen the project uniformity and identity and to deliver clear 
messages to the target audience: W2W naming, logo, presentations template, templates for reports, project newsletter, 
project posters/leaflets, etc. A recognisable visual identity is provided at the proposal stage, to be adapted if required. 
W2W’s communication strategy is built upon the Promotion Mix, the 4th element of the Marketing Mix, focuses on 
creating awareness and persuading the audience to initiate the engagement, as outlined in Table 2.4.   
Table 2.4: Communication plan – Communication Channels/Target Audience/Timeline and Target Values  
Project Website  ALL End-users.  From M06 to 3y after  
W2W dynamic project website will be the backbone of all the D&C activities, allowing easy retrieval of main 
action data with few clicks, while acting as the core source of information about the project’s objectives, activities 
and results. The website will be launched  by M06, and it will be lined with all W2W’s social media accounts. It 
will be constantly maintained and updated regularly, running also for 3years after the project end.  
Target values: Online by: M06; Unique Visitors from M12: > 1,500; Unique Visitors from M48: > 6,500    
Social Media  ALL End-users.  From M06 to M48  
W2W will create and actively maintain its online presence across many social media platforms, utilising Twitter 
and LinkedIn when connecting with research and innovation networks and disseminating new publications, and 
Facebook, and Podcasts for broad community participation.  
Target Values: Size of online community (by M48): >5,000; No. of impressions (monthly average) :>500  
e-Newsletters and 
e-mail Campaigns  
All End-users.  Bi-yearly Issues starting 
from M06  
When project findings are presented, relevant stakeholders will get e -newsletters. Emails are a very effective 
engagement tool, particularly for promoting events and outcomes across domains; hence, project communications 
will be delivered to a selected set  of contact points. Professional marketing solutions (such as Sendinblue and 
Mailchimp) will be utilised to automate the dissemination to contact points.  
Target Values: e-Newsletters contributed/released: 8; Total Mailing List Contact Points: >2,000  
Policy Fora and  
Debate Hubs  
Societal Actors, Debaters, Recycle Operations, Sustainable 
Product Organisations, Workers' Associations, Alliances.  From Μ18 tο Μ48  
With the Science -Policy dialogue as its primary objective, W2W will contribute to discussions and make 
recommendations regarding how the developed solutions could contribute to the sustainable, balanced, and 
inclusive development of secondary material upcycling and waste m anagement across various industry sectors 
and products. W2W intends to contribute to and support the activities of relevant hubs and forums, such as the 
World Economic Forum, Science Policy Forum, EIT RawMaterials Expert Forum, and GS1 linked DPP forums.   
Target Values: No. of Fora and Hubs to interact: >7; Contributions to Policy Fora/Debate Hubs: >15  
Blogs  Digital Innovation Hubs, Relevant Associations, Academia.  From Μ18 tο Μ48  
W2W will link and execute periodic wide marketing operations in open communities, DIHs, blogs, and non-profit 
organisations and channels, such as Gitter Communities , Nature.com, and non -profit organisations, such as 
RawMaterials Innovation Centers of the EIT, etc.   
Target Values: Unique Publications/Contributions to Blogs: >15; Different Blogs to Post: >8  
Printed Material  ALL end users attending physical events  From M06 to M48  
  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8305270 - 05/12/2023 
36  
  
W2W will develop a distinct visual identity and reference promotional instrument when participating in events, 
including brochures, catalogues, posters and any other laid out paper-based resource. Most of the content will be 
in digital format. Printed material will be avoided highlighting on the overall “green” aspect of the project.  
Target Values: No. of hard copies (i.e., brochures, flyers, posters, etc.) distributed: >1500; Roll-up Banners: >6  
Multimedia  ALL end-users focusing on Regional and Local Authorities  From M09 to M48  
The project will develop multimedia content for a self -explanatory and aesthetically pleasing presentation of the 
project, utilizing various distribution channels for marketing (e.g., YouTube, Vimeo). In addition, in close 
connection with the W2W capacity building efforts, a series of video interviews will be conducted with scientific 
partners to collect feedback, taking use of plenary sessions and other pertinent events.  
Target Values: No. of short videos and interviews produced in total: 7; No. of reviews: >10,000  
W2W Exploitation Plan  
Exploitation plan and sustainability  
Turing brilliant R&I into successful commercial products is a complex task with more failures than successes. Most 
failures occur because there is a lack of Product/Market fit or to put it simply, the product that is built is not what the 
market wants to buy. To orientate the outcomes from W2W towards viable commercial solutions and assets, the 
consortium will adopt a focused commercialisation strategy with measurable outcomes by embedding best 
practice into the project’s lifecycle. The exploitation (T19-21.4) and commercialisation tasks (T19-21.5) will focus 
on delivering solutions that have a clear market opportunity that can be proven and validated through the pilots with 
key stakeholders and in close collaboration with formulators, recyclers, public authorities, and standardisation actors. 
The completed business models and marketing plan will aim to outline viable and commercially relevant products 
and assets from the project by taking a broad cross-consortium perspective, with credibility built on a foundation of 
embracing industry best practice for bringing new products to market. To achieve sustainability for the KERs and 
prepare the ground for market entry, the consortium has drafted the exploitation plan presented in Figure 2.1, which 
is split in 3 distinct phases: Phase 1: setting the necessary conditions for the exploration of the business plan; Phase 
2: validating the developed solution, aligns with market and prepares the go to market strategy; Phase 3: featuring 
the sustainability and commercialisation roadmap.  
  
Figure 2.1: W2W exploitation plan and timeline  
Key Exploitable Results (KERs) and individual exploitation plans  
The consortium partners have decided to take a multi -level approach towards managing the knowledge produced, 
where the respective knowledge producer holds the rights to the knowledge and shares the software and material 
implementation with the rest of the consortium. The initial exploitation intentions towards the W2W KERs are 
presented in Table 2.5, which will be further refined and finalised during the project’s duration.  
Table 2.5: W2W KERs (Type: Product (P), Service (S), Other (O); Services: Support (Su), Training (T), Consulting (C), Extension (E))  
W2W KERs  Owner  Type  Licensing  Services  Time to market  
KERs resulting from W2W Pilar 1: Advanced Separation and sorting Technologies  

  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8305270 - 05/12/2023 
37  
  
Optimal wood size particles for cascade 
valorisation  IRIS  P/S  Open-source 
/Commercial  Su, C, E  1y after project  
Cascade valorisation thresholds-led sorting 
system  ICCS  P  Open-source 
/Commercial  Su, E  1y after project  
Optimised separation enabled by Human- 
Robot Collaboration and MR technologies  ICCS  P  Open-source 
/Commercial  Su, E  1y after project  
KERs resulting from W2W Pilar 2: Upcycling Processes and Technologies  
Wood Cascade to function  UHE  P/O  Commercial  Su, E  1y after project  
Wood composites for wallboards    NTUA  P  Commercial  Su, C, T, E  1y after project  
Wood  glue  separation  process  and  
bioremediation wood treatment    
LERMA 
B  O  Open-source 
/Commercial  Su, C, T, E  1y after project  
Liquefaction process of mixed wood waste 
and green adhesives based on polyols  UHE  P/S  Open-source 
/Commercial  Su, C, T, E  1y after project  
Hydrothermal carbonisation and ashes 
valoriasation procedures  CIRCE  P/O  Open-source 
/Commercial  Su, C, T, E  1y after project  
Biotech-driven up-cycling of syngas into 
dodecanol    KIV  P/S  Open-source 
/Commercial  Su, C, T, E  1y after project  
KERs resulting from W2W Pilar 3: Digital Tools for Improving Circular Flows of Secondary Materials  
  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]  
38  
  
Dynamic digital product passport   CERTH   
P/S  
Open-source 
/Commercial  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8305270 - 
05/12/2023 
Su, C, E  
0.5y after project  
Material volume estimation tool     ICCS  P/S  
  
Open-source 
/Commercial  Su, C, E  0.5y after project  
Supply chain management tool for upcycling 
of secondary materials   UPV  P/S  Open-source 
/Commercial  Su, C, E  0.5y after project  
Life cycle sustainability assessment tool for 
cascade pathways  DRAXIS  P/S  Open-source 
/Commercial  Su, C, E  0.5y after project  
Integrated circular wood upcycling platform  EBOS  P/S  Open-source 
/Commercial  Su, C, E  0.5y after project  
KERs resulting from W2W Pilar 4: Supportive Framework in Policy, Market, and Skills  
Wood cascade data sharing model  TUB  S/O  Open-source  C, T, E  0.5y after project  
Circularity and upcycling for cascade 
valorisation & Recycling classification 
frameworks for recycled wood  
All 
relevant 
partners  
O  Open-source  C, E  0.5y after project  
Training programs for upcycling, based on 
collaborative design  
All 
relevant 
partners  
S/O  Open-source  T  0.5y after project  
Given the low to medium TRL level of the under-development tools, KER characteristics and exploitation routes are 
to be constantly evaluated and updated as project progresses and engagement with stakeholders provide necessary 
feedback to the consortium regarding exploitation characteristics and potential. The business potential of each of the 
KERs is also very much related to the local regulations of upcycling/recycling and will be continuously monitored 
during the implementation of the project.   
Preliminary market analysis with needs, value propositions, and target stakeholders for exploitation The EU's 
wood-based industries cover a wide range of downstream activities, including woodworking, furniture, pulp and 
paper, manufacturing and converting industries and printing and altogether, approximately 393,000 enterprises were 
active in wood-based industries in 2020, represented the 19% of the manufacturing enterprises across Europe. The 
Gross V alue Added (GV A) of the wood industry was evaluated to  €136 billion44, while there is a significant wood 
recycling market with at least 450 wood recycling companies serving Europe53. Along these lines, the wood wastes 
in Europe accounted for 50.2Mt in 2018, coming from municipal waste - 24.33Mt, wood industry – 5.6Mt and CDW 
– 19.17Mt54. Focusing on CDW, wood waste is considered its second leading element, contributing to at least 20 –
30% of the total CDW stream is USA and for more than 35% of all waste generated in Europe45. Adding to this 
percentage, according to the European Federation of Furniture Manufacturers, furniture waste in Europe accounts 
for more than 4% of the total municipal solid waste stream46. As 37% of the European wood waste is intended for 
landfill and incineration (33% is used for heat production or cogeneration and 33% for material recovery) 47, the 
EU endorsed three legislative establishing rules for waste management and binding, targeting a) for recycling wood 
from packaging by 25% until 2025 and 30% by 2030, b) reuse and recycle municipal waste by 55% by 2025 and 
60% by 2025, and c) reducing landfilling waste (maximum of 10% of municipal waste by 2030)48. Thus, it may come 
as no surprise that the wood recycling market is estimated to grow at a CAGR of 7.32% between 2022 and 2027, 
while its size is forecasted to increase by USD 10.69 billion over the same timeframe49. An additional reason for this 
shift is the fact that the recycled wood is up to 40% cheaper than fresh wood and generally dryer, leading to energy 
savings for the particleboard manufacturing process, as well as prolongs material circulation and reduces the need 
for additional lumbering. While higher grades of wood chips can be used for material recycling, lower-grade waste 
wood can replace conventional fossil energy sources50.   
 
44 https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php?title=Wood_products_-_production_and_trade#Wood-based_industries   
53 https://www.environmental-expert.com/waste-recycling/wood-recycling/companies/serving-europe  54 
https://www.cabdirect.org/globalhealth/abstract/20183327380   
45 Jahan, I.; Zhang, G.; Bhuiyan, M.; Navaratnam, S. Circular Economy of Construction and Demolition Wood Waste—A Theoretical Framework Approach. Sustainability 2022, 14,  
10478. https://doi.org/10.3390/su141710478  
46 European Environment bureau, 2017. “Circular economy opportunities in the furniture sector”   
47 Besserer, A., Troilo, S., Girods, P., Rogaume, Y ., & Brosse, N. (2021). Cascading Recycling of Wood Waste: A Review. Polymers, 13(11), 1752. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/polym13111752  
48 Cocchi Μ., Boulday D. (2018) D2.4: Recommendations for Industry Stakeholders (2018), Bioreg project  
49 https://eur04.safelinks.protection.outlook.com/GetUrlReputation    
50 https://www.tomra.com/en/discover/waste-metal-recycling/news/2022/wood-recycling-from-waste-to-resource   

  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]  
39  
  
Based on this preliminary market analysis, the use of innovative solutions like those to be developed by W2W 
targeting the more resource efficient use of waste wood, are vital for the waste management sector in Europe51. W2W 
separation technologies will increase by 30% the total wood collected for recycling instead of landfilling: by 
taking into account the fact that the 80% of waste wood – approximately 40.1Mt - is estimated to belong to B, C and  
  
D categories, it is estimated that the use of W2W separation technologies will enable the upcycling of 20%Associated 
with document Ref. Ares(2023)8305270 - 05/12/2023 of this  
quantity (8.02 Mt) towards category A, the non-processed wood and the cleanest among the wood classes that can 
be recycled and reused. The remaining non -recyclable wood waste–31.9Mt of B, C and D categories (60% of the 
initial quantity) after the application of the W2W upcycling methods - will be valorised as feedstock for bioenergy, 
that will further reduce landfilling. As the pre -treatment of the biomass increases the bioenergy’s competitiveness 
with fossil fuels, and given that 0.056t CO2/GJ are emissions during heat production, at a carbon price of €25/tCO2, 
bioenergy is competitive at prices up to €10.8/GJ, while at a carbon price of €150/tCO2, bioenergy is competitive at 
prices up to €17.8/GJ, including the costs of biomass and the costs of pre -treatment52. Since, recycling wood waste 
can create an inexpensive renewable material source  to enhance economic growth and create employment 
opportunities while minimise landfill costs and space costs 53 , we believe that the status of the market offers 
favourable framework conditions to position the innovative circular technologies of W2W across a diverse 
array of customer groups, as outlined in Table 2.6.  
Table 2.6: Preliminary outline of W2W customers’ needs and value propositions  
Customers   Key Needs  Main Value Propositions  
Wood waste 
Suppliers  
• Valorisation of by-products 
streams;  
• Increased profitability;   
• Reduced carbon footprint;   
• Reduce disposal costs.  
- Sustainable pathways for utilising by-product/waste;  - 
Alternative and increased revenue streams along with 
reduced taxes due to decreased waste management;  - 
Compliance with the EU regulation frameworks regarding 
waste, packaging, emissions and circular economy.  
Producers / 
Processors   
• Scale-up production to meet 
increased demand;  
• Return on investment on 
sustainable technologies;  
• Compliance with 
regulations.  
- Increased efficiency in production processes with 
costeffective technologies;  
- Improved sustainability and marketable products 
with lower carbon footprint;  
- New business models serving as concrete demand, 
improving economic performance.   
End-users  
• Environmental-friendly 
products;  
• Reduced waste;  
• Preservation of natural 
environment.  
- Increased quality of the produced products;  
- Affordability of the products;   
- Improved sustainability with lower carbon footprint.  
For the value propositions to effectively address the needs of the potential customer groups, W2W solutions and 
products need to be introduced to market, and keep its value chains sustainably operational. To this end, an initial set 
of requirements and potential obstacles that the exploitation strategy needs address , as well as key relevant actions 
and levers that will be employed were identified, as presented in Table 2.7.   
  
Table 2.7: Initial set of requirements, potential obstacles, actions and supporting factors for exploitation  
Requirements & 
Obstacles  Relevant Actions and Supporting Factors for W2W Exploitation  
 
51 Besserer, A.; Troilo, S.; Girods, P.; Rogaume, Y .; Brosse, N. Cascading Recycling of WoodWaste: A Review. Polymers 2021, 13, 1752. https://doi.org/10.3390/ polym13111752  
52 A.SPIRE, (2020) Processes4Planet 2050 Strategic Research and Innovation Agenda (SRIA)  
53 Jahan, I.; Zhang, G.; Bhuiyan, M.; Navaratnam, S. Circular Economy of Construction and Demolition Wood Waste—A     
Theoretical Framework Approach. Sustainability 2022, 14, 10478. https://doi.org/10.3390/su141710478  

  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]  
40  
  
Lack of interest in the 
innovative services and 
digital tools produced   
The benefits of W2W innovative services and digital tools will be demonstrated and 
validated, alongside their pilot implementation. W2W solutions will be designed with 
actual end-users in complete value chains, safeguarding, that they will cover real user 
needs. User acceptance will be validated at several stages to build confidence, that 
solutions and products can respond to market demands.  
Further advancement of 
techs in terms of TRL  
after the end of the grant, 
to reach the  
commercialisation stage   
Partners (researchers, technology developers and value chain players) are highly 
motivated by the potential of the W2W solutions and are committed to exploit the 
project’s results, investing the resources required to develop them further, to reach 
the comm ercialisation stage. Go -to-market strategies (with identified options for 
acquiring external financing / funding if needed) to this end will be delivered, before 
the end of the project.  
IPR management  
An IPR management strategy will be developed during the project, describing the 
baseline for managing the IP produced within W2W and setting the basis for the 
exploitation of project results after the end of the grant. Specifically, for IP protection, 
the proper protection measures will be identified and all the necessary actions to  
  
 apply them will be carried out (starting within the project’s duration), to facilitate Associated 
with document Ref. Ares(2023)8305270 - 05/12/2023 exploitation at least within the target market of 
W2W.   
Needs for standardisation   
As any new technology, compliance and refinement (if needed) to existing standards 
and certification are key requirements for its release to the market. As the further 
development of related standards can affect market growth, W2W will consider 
standardisation activities, to support easy-to-market solutions.  
Sustainability of 
financing for exploitation 
after the project end  
Aside from investing own resources, partners are willing to continue the development 
and exploitation of the W2W technologies and products, sustainably operating the 
value chains set up and demonstrated during the project. Further financing sources 
will be  investigated as well, either from national and EU funds, and/or by 
approaching private investors, building on the go -to-market strategies developed 
during the project.  
Availability of initial 
demand for driving  
product sales and  
establishing market shares  
The consortium’s pilot partners will provide the initial demand needed to successfully 
market the solutions of W2W beyond the end of the grant. As early adopters, they are 
also committed to further promote the technologies/products to their ecosystem for 
identifying additional customers.  
2.2.2 Strategy for the Management of Intellectual Property   
IPR issues have been discussed by the consortium during the proposal preparation phase for the commitment of the 
offered technical solutions and by consulting their respective partners’ legal offices. In conformance with the rules 
for participation of curr ent European Programs, a minimum set of basic principles concerning ownership of 
knowledge and access rights have been fixed and will be detailed with the signature of a consortium agreement (CA), 
before the start of the project, which will regulate rights  and obligations by all partners and will be further updated 
this during the project. The IPR provisions distinguish between 2 basic types: i) Background Knowledge: Access 
rights necessary for the execution of the project will be granted on a royalty free basis. ii) Foreground Knowledge: 
Intellectual property protection of foreground, i.e., the new technologies and knowledge developed in the project and 
its applications will be filled, owned and funded by the partner(s) that developed the particular results. Each partner 
shall inform the Project Coordinator and the project partners 4 weeks in advance of the filing of a patent application. 
Subject to the provisions of the EU Grant Agreement and the CA any owner of any result shall be free to use such 
results and to move it to the market. In case of joint ownership each owner shall be free to use such results in its own 
organisation but adhere to the CA and exploitation strategy with regards to commercialisation.  
Relevant to knowledge management W2W will employ the following strategy: • Intra-Consortium Knowledge 
Management: 1) Technical and scientific progress: create documents and place them in a document repository to 
ensure that every partner has access to them. 2) Exploitation perspectives: the WP exploitation leader will structure, 
and map required knowledge and extra-knowledge needed to enhance exploitation (i.e., patents, technology transfer 
agreements, potential users, other projects) and propose an exploit ation strategy. • Extra-Consortium Knowledge 
Management: Knowledge management will take place through dissemination to maximise the impact of the work 
done within the project. The exploitation leader will be in charge of collecting and proposing to the consortium all 

  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]  
41  
  
matters referring to the results for dissemination and will monitor the productivity of the project in terms of 
knowledge publications (scientific papers, posters, etc.). The IPR owner of each of W2W KERs is already identified 
in T2.5 as well as the licensing possibilities of each of the KERs. The exact strategy of IPR management is to be set 
the exploitation deliverables of the project already provided by M06 in D19.2.   
 #§COM-DIS-VIS-CDV§# 
 
 
  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]
2.3 Summary  Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8305270 - 05/12/2023 
Specific Needs  Expected Results   D & E & C Measures  
• Waste wood recycling processes 
are hampered by additives, pollutants and 
contaminating materials.  
• Proper wood sorting requires 
costly analyses and technologies.  
• Limited information about the 
composition of wood products and 
components presents in waste.  
• Industries using waste wood as 
feedstock have limited control on its 
supply.  
• Wood classification not 
harmonised at EU level. Wood suitable 
for material use may be sent to 
incineration because of outdated 
characterisation schemes and legislation.  
• Compared to energy use, wood 
recycling requires additional sorting, 
cleaning, chemical or mechanical 
treatment, transportation to the 
processing facility and additional 
administrative work, making it less 
profitable.  
Pillar 1:  Advanced separation & sorting technologies   
KER1: Optimal wood size particles for cascade valorisation; KER2: 
Cascade valorisation thresholds-led sorting system; KER3: Optimised 
separation enabled by Human -Robot Collaboration and MR 
technology  
 Dissemination (D):   
• Peer-review Journals >15; Scientific 
Conferences  
>20   
• Technical Publications >25; Industrial Booths 
>9  • Relevant initiatives: >15; Scientific 
Conversations:  
20  
• Workshops >10; Training Tutorials: >8; 
Webinars  
>12; • Fairs to Participate: >9  
• Standards Contribution: ≥3; Policy Briefs: >2  
  
Communication (C):   
• Website Online by M06 and running for 3years 
after the project end; >6,500 unique visitors by M48  
• Size of online community >5,000; Impressions 
>500   
• Newsletters: 8; Policy Fora/Debate Hubs: >15;  
Publications to Blogs: >15  
• Hard Copies Distributed >1,500; Roll-up 
Banners >6   
• Videos produced: 7   
  
Exploitation (E):  
Open version of the W2W Frameworks, Procedures,  
Pillar 2: Upcycling Processes and Technologies    
KER4: Wood Cascade to function; KER5: Wood composites for 
wallboards; KER6: Wood glue separation; KER7: Bioremediation 
wood treatment; KER8: Mixed wood liquefaction; KER9: 
Hydrothermal Carbonisation; KER10: Biotech -driven up -cycling of 
syngas into dodecanol; KER11: Ashes valorisation.  
 
Pillar 3: Digital Tools for Improving Circular Flows KER12: LCA 
Sustainability Assessment Tool for Cascade Pathways; KER13: 
Material V olume Estimation; KER14: DPP; KER15: Supply Chain 
management tool for the optimisation of upcycling of secondary 
materials; KER16: Integrated Circular Wood Upcycling Platform.  
 
Pillar 4: Supportive Framework in Policy, Market, and Skills   
KER17: W2W Stakeholders Network; KER18: Classification 
framework for recycled wood; KER19: Wood cascade data sharing 
model; KER20: Trainings for Upcycling, Replication & Cooperation; 
KER21: Synergies hub for circularity; KER22:  Circularity/Upcycling 
framework for cascade valorisation; KER23: Contribution to 
standardisation & certification; KER24: Business models.  
 

 
 
Models, Tools and Data Repository, and Practical 
Services / Guidelines under a fee (post-project) to 
ensure sustainability.  
Target Groups  Outcomes   Impacts  
A: Process industry companies, including involved production 
of wood-based products and combustion processes; B: 
Recycling companies involved in the collection, sorting and 
processing of secondary raw materials; C: Manufacturers of new 
products made from secondary raw materials; D: Public  
Authorities responsible for waste management & environmental 
protection; E: Standardisation organisations developing 
standards for the use of secondary raw materials in the process 
industry; F: Research and academic institutions; G: Workers and 
employees in the process industry and recycling sectors; H: End-
users and consumers of products made from secondary raw 
materials; I: The broader society and environment.  
• Three complete value chains 
demonstrating the successful upcycling of 
wood-containing waste;   
• Improved production performance, 
GHG savings, and reduced costs for the 
upcycling or wood from C&D and furniture 
waste; • Uptake of W2W methods, 
scientific and technological  results  by 
 at  least  25 companies and 
organisations;  
• High use of the scientific knowledge 
published regarding elements of the W2W 
technologies and tools.  
 Scientific impact:  
Advanced state-of-the-art in wood recycling.  
Economic impact:  
Cost savings for companies, new job opportunities;  
Enhanced competitiveness of European companies.   
Societal impact:  
Increased resource efficiency in the wood value chain, 
improvement in employment and social levels.   
Environmental impact:  
Reduced demand for virgin wood, prevention of the 
release of greenhouse gases and other harmful 
substances into the environment, prevention of 
deforestation.  
#§IMP-ACT-IA§# 
35  
  
  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]  
44  
  
3 Quality and Efficiency of the Implementation Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8305270 - 
05/12/2023#@QUA-LIT-QL@# #@WRK-PLAWP@#
3.1 Work Plan and Resources   
3.1.1 Work Packages and their Interrelation   
The project is organised in 21 Work Packages (WPs): eighteen correspond to the project’s objectives (WP4-21), and 
three (WP1-3) that coordinate the project activities during the three reporting periods (M01 -M18, M19-M36, and 
M37-M48). Figure 3.1 illustrates the relationships between the WPs and summarises the project structure, which is 
organised around the 4 W2W innovation pillars.  
  
Figure 3.1: W2W PERT chart and WP dependencies  
3.1.2 Timing of the Work Packages and Tasks   
  
  
3.1.3 Allocation of Resources Summary of Consortium Effort   
  
Table with PMs per WP and per Partner  

  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]  
45  
  
  
‘Subcontracting costs’ items   
  
Table 3.1.g Subcontracting cost items  
  
Partner  Cost (€)  Justification  
2/LERMAB  25,000  Technical work needed for the upgrade of the steam explosion equipment. The needed 
budget covers the technical work to be undertaken to cover all the upgrades of the 
system to cover the needed volumes of W2S  
14/P&G  45,000  Lab synthesis to convert a few kgs of the Alanine derived from Fermentation into 
MGDA in order to be able to formulate, and test it.  
Purchase costs’ (travel and subsistence, equipment and other goods, works and services)  
  
Table 3.1.h Purchase costs’ (travel and subsistence, equipment and other goods, works and services)  
  
  
1/ICCS  Cost (€)  Justification  13/KIVERDI  Cost (€)  Justification  
Equipment  535,000  
Hyperspectral Camera covering up 
to 2500nm (150K) MWIR Camera 
(120K)  
XR sensing devices (60K)   
2 Delta robots (100K)  
1 cobot (60K)  
2 vision Cameras(20K)  
PLC and controls units(25K)   
  
Other Goods 
and services  
  
218,000  
External service for the renting of 
open demo facility for 
preparatory set-up trials in WP11 
and full demo trials optimization 
in WP12 by Kiverdi Staff . In 
detail, during the project, Kiverdi 
will leverage an external 
manufacturing pilot plant, Trials 
will be carried out and supervised 
by Kiverdi staff in synergy with 
the pilot plant owner using 
KIVERDI’s proprietary 
microorganism, technology, 
know-how, intellectual property,  
                  Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8305270 - 
05/12/2023     
Partner WP1 WP2 WP3 WP4 WP5 WP6 WP7 WP8 WP9 WP10 WP11 WP12 WP13 WP14 WP15 WP16 WP17 WP18 WP19 WP20 WP21 TOTAL 
1/ICCS 10.00 10.00 6.00 7.00 20.50 36.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 14.00 11.00 13.50 2.00 2.00 1.00 6.00 6.00 3.00 166.00 
2/LERMAB 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 26.00 41.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 68.50 
3/CIRCE 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 73.00 37.50 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.50 0.50 0.50 113.50 
4/NTUA 5.00 5.00 5.00 10.00 1.00 1.00 14.00 20.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 16.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2.00 2.00 2.00 83.00 
5/POLIMI 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2.00 2.00 0.00 11.00 11.00 9.00 2.00 2.00 2.00 44.00 
6/VTT 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 9.00 9.00 7.50 0.50 0.50 0.50 28.50 
7/UPV 0.50 0.50 0.50 4.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 11.00 16.00 0.00 2.00 2.00 1.40 0.70 0.70 0.70 40.00 
8/CERTH 3.00 1.00 3.00 5.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 13.00 33.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.50 0.50 2.00 61.00 
9/UHE 1.00 1.00 0.50 0.00 0.00 0.00 20.00 22.00 14.00 18.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 76.50 
10/TUB 1.00 1.00 1.00 31.20 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 34.20 
11/UJOH 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 8.00 8.00 9.00 25.00 
12/ELAK 1.00 1.00 1.00 4.00 8.00 8.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 6.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 32.00 
13/KIV 1.00 1.00 0.40 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 18.00 18.00 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.50 42.90 
14/P&G 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 14.00 15.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 29.00 
15/FOCCHI 2.25 2.25 2.25 0.00 0.00 0.00 11.00 11.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.75 1.75 1.75 36.00 
16/DRAXIS 0.40 0.40 0.20 20.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 22.00 43.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 89.00 
17/EBOS 5.00 5.00 5.00 6.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 16.00 20.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 5.00 2.00 2.00 66.00 
18/QPLAN 1.45 1.20 0.60 2.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.75 0.00 0.00 0.00 19.75 9.85 2.60 39.20 
19/R2M 1.00 1.00 1.00 2.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 8.00 14.00 14.00 43.00 
20/IRIS 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.00 19.00 19.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.50 0.50 0.50 41.00 
21/CEPS 0.70 0.65 0.65 8.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 5.00 5.00 4.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 24.00 
22/ISWA 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 8.00 8.00 5.00 24.00 
23/RCM 1.00 1.00 1.00 2.00 3.00 3.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 16.00 
24/UNE 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 5.00 4.00 5.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 15.50 
TOTAL 38.80 36.50 32.60 101.20 51.50 67.00 48.00 56.00 43.00 62.00 108.00 73.50 80.50 125.50 41.8 34.50 33.50 28.40 66.70 59.80 49.1 1237.80 

  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]  
46  
  
 
     Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8305270 - 
05/12/2023confidential  information,  
specifications and protocols.   
  
Other Goods 
and services  
  
78,500  
 particleboards  validation  and 
characterization  
  
       
Rem.(<15%)  93,400    Rem.(<15%)  37,400     
Total  706,900    Total  255,400     
2/LERMAB  Cost (€)  Justification  14/FOCCHI  Cost (€)  Justification   
Other Goods 
and services  
  
45,000  Consumables used for the steam 
explosion (20K) and consumables 
used for bioremediation(25K)  
  
Other Goods 
  
and services  
  
35,000  Testing activities of the produced 
materials as part of the product 
validation (35K)  
 
Rem.(<15%)  36,000    Rem.(<15%)  18,400     
Total  81,000    Total  53,400     
4/NTUA  Cost (€)  Justification         
Equipment   90,000  
Pilot scale extruder upgrade: 
Purchase of a twin -screw 
extrusion system to be used for 
compounding a wide range of 
biodegradable/biobased polymers 
and producing compounds for 
biocomposites manufacture. 
(70K)  
Thermoforming equipment for the 
pellets: Purchase of a heatedplates 
press equipment that will allow to 
process the biocomposite 
materials and transform them into 
building blocks. (20K)  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
 
Other Goods 
and services  
  
40,000  
Consumables  for  the 
implementation of the pilot scale 
tests in WP7, WP8  
  
       
 
Rem.(<15%)  24,000           
Total  154,000           
7/UPV  Cost (€)  Justification  20/IRIS  Cost (€)  Justification   
Other Goods 
and services  
  
25,920  
Project Meetings, meetings with 
other partners, conferences etc. 
24trips*1080 = 25920  
   
 Other Goods 
and services   
 77,000  
46k€ consumables and supplies 
for building 2  
prototypes; 4k€ of costs for IPR 
protection, material and events 
registrations fees, publication 
fees for open access journal; 
software licenses 2k€; 
transportation and insurance of 
prototypes 10 
15k€  
monitoring 
dissemination  
k€; safety tests  

  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]  
47  
  
Rem.(<15%)  12,600    Rem.(<15%)  9,600     
Total  38,520    Total  86,600     
9/UHE  Cost (€)  Justification  22/ISWA  Cost (€)  Justification   
Other Goods 
and services  
  
41,000  
Chemicals needed for the 
operation of the pilot activities 
31.5K.   
Publication fees 9.5K  
  
  
  
Other Goods 
and services   
 21,000  
 D&C  material  
website, newsletter, social 
media, videos)  
(branding,  
Rem.  
(<15%)  49,500    Rem.  
(<15%)  14,400     
Total  90,500    Total  35,400  Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8305270 - 
05/12/2023  
11/UJOH  Cost (€)  Justification  23/RCM  Cost (€)  Justification  
Travel  and 
subsistence  
  
10,060  Project meetings and travels for 
conferences (10,060)  
 Travelling  
Costs   10,200  Project meetings and travels for 
conferences (10,200)  
Rem.  
(<15%)  19,036    Rem.  
(<15%)  0    
Total  29,096    Total  10,200    
12/ELAK  Cost (€)  Justification  24/UNE  Cost (€)  Justification  
Travel  and 
subsistence  
  
14,400  
Project meetings and travels for 
conferences (14,400)  
 Travel  and 
subsistence  
  
8,800  
Project meetings and travels for 
conferences (8,800)  
Rem.  
(<15%)  10,000    Rem.  
(<15%)  4,000    
Total  24,400    Total  12,800    
  
Internally invoiced goods and services  
  
Table 3.1i: Other costs categories/ internally invoiced goods and services  
  
Partner  Cost(€)  Justification  
6/VTT  7,679.07  Costs related to the usage of internal equipment and specifically of computing platform 
technology platform/research infrastructure which is a distributed computational cluster 
for high -performance computing. With the cluster, it is possible to conduct technical 
analyses, calculations and simulations of different scientific phenomena requiring 
heavyduty parallel calculation, where dozens of computing units are needed at the same 
time. This item relates to WP16, 17 & 18.  
9/UHE  4,000  Costs related to the usage of lab equipment essential for the activities of fraction 
cascading.  
14/P&G  45,000  Costs related to the equipment used to convert fatty alcohols in ionic-surfactants.  

  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]  
48
3.2 Capacity of Participants and Consortium as a 
Whole #@CON-SOR-CS@# #@PRJ -MGT-PM@# W2W will be executed by a 
well-balanced and multi -disciplinary consortium composed by 25 
partners from 9 EU and 1 nonassociated non -EU countries (Figure 
3.2); particularly 11 academic and research organisations, 5 large 
companies, 5 SMEs, a leading think tank, 2 associations and a public 
organisation. ICCS will act as coordinator; its wide experience in 
EU projects of relevance of W2W ensures the correct execution of 
the pr oject. The consortium is a high -quality partnership fully 
capable to attain the targeted objectives  and has been selected to 
include key actors essential to create synergies, ensuring that the 
project results will maximise the use of secondary resources in the 
process industry across Europe and internationally. The partners 
were carefully selected in order to fulfil the W2W Innovation Pillars 
mandatory for the execution of the project, and a series of transversal 
activities needed to maximise the  
outreach and the impact of the developed results. More specifically the role of the partners in relation to the pillars of 
the project are (depicted in Figure 3.3):   
Figure 3.2 
: 
 W2W geographical distribution 
  
  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]  
49  
  
Pillar 1 : Advanced Separation and Sorting  
ELAK is operating in a series of construction sites 
whereas some of the companies of the organisation 
are operating their own waste management plans. 
The related experience will support the design of a 
sorting mechanism ready to be deployed both at 
construction sites, but with an upscaling too 
towards a centralised CDW processing center. IRIS 
with a long experience in sensing will support the 
solutions related to the optimal shredding of the 
objects to be separated,  an issue that is not 
commonly currently addressed neither in terms of 
optimal size for separation nor in terms of 
optimization of the used sensing devices. IRIS will 
use as a base various spectroscopic technique which 
are available in their labs and already demonstrated 
in relevant projects. ICCS will use its premises to 
perform the first tests of the sorting system, taking 
advantage of the multiple sensing and robotics 
solutions available in the lab. The experience of developing similar systems shall be used towards the design of the 
envisaged modular system. Existing MR devices will be initially tested as part of the system and the optimal 
hardware for the operation of the final system is to be decided. The first tests of Cobots with MR assisted workers 
shall also take place at the premises of ICCS. The final system, based on the final will be installed either at one of 
the available construction sites of ELAK, the premises of one of their subsidiaries or at the premises of ICCS. In 
any of the above cases the consortium members ensure access to the infrastructure needed for the design as well as 
the final system installation.   
Pillar 2: W2W Upcycling Technologies Cascade Refinement Technologies: UHE has long experience in wood 
cascade to function technologies which are demonstrated in a series of publications and be the basis for many other 
studies. This will be the basis for W2W technologies ensuring access to the labs of UHE for the performance of the 
pilot activities and knowledge at a State-of-the-art level. NTUA already owns an extruder and can produce pellets at 
a small size compared to the ones needed for the project. The existing equipment will be used for the initial tests and 
will be further upscaled during the duration of the project. The NTUA labs shall be used for the installation of the 
equipment. FOCCHI owns their own testing facilities whereas with the support of R2M, additional certification 
tests shall be performed ensuring the quality of the final products. Chemical and Bioremediation Technologies : 
LERMAB has a long experience and has demonstrated in a series of publications the wood cascade valorisation 
approach with the usage of various upcycling techniques. As part of the project th e existing steam explosion 
equipment will be used and further upgraded to process higher quantities of input material. The labs of LERMAB 
shall also be used for the bioremediation processes, offering the possibility to start the work on samples already 
seasoned for a period of time. UHE will collaborate with LERMAB on the production of green adhesives based on 
polyols, part of the work that both partners had individually done in the part aiming to share best practices as part of 
W2W. Finally, LERMAB shall work on the development of new products and will ensure the smooth validation 
and testing of the produced materials. Energy Gas and Ashes Valorisation: CIRCE has a long experience in energy 
related projects having demonstrated a series of energy optimization projects. The MW assisted HTC process will 
initially take place at the existing premises whereas further improvements during the project shall be performed. The 
needed gasification equipment is also placed at the premises of CIRCE and the needed processe s will be 
implemented there. KIV owns pilot facilities (1Lt, 10Lt and 20Lt) to carry out pressurized gas fermentation equipped 
with control system for parameters optimisation, downstream units (centrifugation, separation units, distillation) and 
analytical equipment for characterisation of intermediates and products. During the project it will be upscaled to 
reach the expected volumes and showcase the TRL6 level. P&G has a demonstrated collaboration with KIV and 
shall ensure the validation of the developed samples both in their premises but also with the support of external labs.   
Pillar 3: W2W Digital Tools for Improving Circular Flows of Secondary Materials Life Cycle Sustainability 
Assessment Tool for Cascade Pathways : DRAXIS has significant experience and scientific expertise on LCA of 
waste management systems, policy analysis regarding waste management, integrated plans for the management of 
municipal solid waste, planning of waste prevention strategies, development of monito ring indicators and 
procedures, and delivering effective tools for environmental monitoring and policy design, as it has participated in 
>10 European and national circular economy projects related to waste valorisation, industrial symbiosis, LCA and 
digital transition. Material V olume Estimation: ICCS has significant experience, demonstrated by numerous projects 
Figure 
  
3.3 
: 
  
Role of the W2W partners in each innovation pil 
l 
ar  
  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8305270 - 05/12/2023 
  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8305270 - 05/12/2023 
50  
  
in which it acts as a coordinator or partner, in the integration of applications of automation and advanced technologies 
- e.g., virtual reality, artificial reality, data management etc. - in highly reliable multi -functional smart integrated 
systems that provide innovative solutions for addressing societal needs. Digital Product Passport: CERTH is one of 
the largest research centres in Greece. The department participating in the project will develop the W2W DPP 
building on its significant experience in the f ields of machine learning, deep learning, multimodal retrieval, 
knowledge engineering, semantic integration of heterogeneous resources, semantic reasoning, discovery and mining 
of heterogeneous multilingual and multimedia Web resources, social media monitoring, as well as on the processing 
and analysis of the multimodal data extracted from them. Supply Chain Management Tool for the optimisation of  
upcycling of secondary materials: UPV is one of the top-ranked technical universities of Spain, and since 2010, it is 
a recognised European International Excellence Campus. The Research Centre on Production Management and 
Engineering (CIGIP) is at the leading edge on collaboration and interoperability in the supply chain, and in particular: 
Modelling and Simulation  of Supply Chains, Production Planning Under Uncertainty Modelling, Enterprise 
Resilience, Enterprise Interoperability, Internationalisation of Operations. UPV will utilise its wide experience from 
its participation (since 1994) in several European and Spanish Research Projects and several research & development 
contracts with regional industrial firms from different industrial sectors. Integrated Circular Wood Upcycling  
Platform: EBOS technical role in the project, given its 18 years+ of expertise as a software powerhouse, is to design, 
develop and integrate the Integrated Circular Wood Upcycling Platform including its visualisation. EBOS will lead 
the digitalisation activities, leveraging its rich experience in the ICT domain, while, from the exploitation side, EBOS 
expects to advance knowledge and reinforce understanding in W2W advances, extending the company’s activities.  
Pillar 4: W2W Upcycling technologies: Supportive Framework in Policy, Market, and Skills Framework for 
CDW Cascade Valorisation and Classification Regulations: Through its wide and recognised experience in the field, 
CEPS will create the initial step towards the developed frameworks, as it will perform a study on parameters linked 
to wood characterisation and on the existing classification schemes at country level. NTUA will leverage its 
involvement to relevant projects and initiatives, by leading the devel opment of the CDW recycled wood cascade 
valorisation framework. DRAXIS, TUB and ICCS will actively support the development of the W2W framework, 
leveraging their long involvement in the recycled material and circular economy sectors. Skills Development: VTT 
and POLIMI will closely collaborate, leveraging their wide experience in the training and skills development, as 
well as their existing learning tools and techniques, to form the basis for innovative skills approaches, in the form of 
interventions tailored to effectively support the workforce through engaging the twin transition skills ecosystem. 
Contribution to Standardisation and Certification : UNE will lead the W2W standardisation activities and promote 
the project results to its wide network of relevant experts, bodies and organisations, while CEPS will push the 
developed policy report that summarising the actions needed for a European Scale implementation of the W2W 
proposed cascade valorisation scheme, to its extensive network of policy - and decision-makers. Business Models 
and Commercialisation: R2M will lead the exploitation activities of the project, leveraging its rich experience in 
R&D and commercial projects, aiming at the alignment of the project activities with the defined revenue streams. 
QPLAN will focus on pushing the W2W KERs into the market, through its experience, existing techniques, 
pathways, developed revenue streams and network of stakeholders on the relevant fields.    
#§CON-SOR-CS§# #§PRJ-MGT-PM§#  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8305270 - 05/12/2023 
51  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
4. Ethics  
The consortium confirms compliance with the ethical principles and the applicable EU, international, and national 
laws for the ethics issues identified in the Ethics Summary Report and any additional ethics issues that may emerge 
in the course of the grant , will be ensured. The Consortium also confirms that for any applicable ethics issue, the 
guidance provided in the European Commission Ethics Self-Assessment Guidelines will be rigorously followed.  
  
4.1. Ethical dimension of the objectives, methodology and likely impact  
  
Each member of the W2W who is leading or participating in research task that involves human participants will ensure the 
respect for people and for human dignity, fair distribution of the benefits and burden of research, and the protection of the  
values, rights and interests of the research participants. Ethical standards and guidelines will be rigorously followed and 
applied, irrespectively of the country in which the research is carried out. The necessary ethics approvals must be obtained,  if 
required, as well as free and fully informed consent of the research participants. It is the responsibility of each member of the 
consortium leading an activity to obtain the relevant approvals and to ensure that their research complies with the laws and 
regulations in all the EU Member States in which the research takes place.  
Human participants will be required to provide information e.g. via interviews, online forms and questionnaires that will be 
used for user engagement, stakeholder’s identification, definition of scenarios, and gathering inputs and feedback for the 
project and the new solutions and technologies to be developed . Participation is voluntary and before any relevant research 
activity that involves humans, each individual will signify their agreement to participate with a clear affirmative act, W2W will 
apply clear informed consent procedures with a dedicated consent forms. Although no adverse side effects are expected, a plan 
for collecting, reporting, and managing solicited and spontaneously reported adverse events and other unintended effects of 
projects' interventions will be undertaken. All partners are fully aware of this Charter and Directive and have abided by these 
regulations in past and on-going research projects and any individual partners belonging to professional bodies will abide by 
the ethics rules and regulations of these bodies. W2W consortium will keep a record of all potential ethical issues that arise as 
project is developed and evaluated, and through discussion with the stakeholders. Ethics approval for the project will be sou ght 
from all necessary and applicable review panels and relevant committees in all partner countries undertaking any work. 
Consortium will examine the following aspects in every related activity:  
•Composition, roles, and responsibilities of the partners in charge;  
•Description of research questions, specific objectives and justification for undertaking the study or analysis; •Description  
of study design, including type, settings and sites where data will be collected;  
•Inclusion and exclusion criteria for participants;  
•Time schedule of enrollment and assessments;  
•Estimated number of participants needed to achieve study objectives and how these were determined;  
•Plans for assessment and collection of outcome, baseline, and other trial data and study instruments;  
•Who will obtain informed consent or assent from potential trial participants or authorized surrogates, and how;  
•How personal information about potential and enrolled participants will be collected, shared, erased/anonymized if necessary  
and maintained;  
  
Besides the high potential of AI, there are also risks, such as privacy, malicious use and jobs opportunity decrement, among 
others[1].  
  
[W2W][101138789][ HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-42]  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8305270 - 05/12/2023 
52  
  
Hence is crucial to assure its proper use having in mind its trustworthiness, as recently stated by the European Commission i n 
the Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy AI[2]. W2W will develop AI algorithms for waste management and sorting and for some 
of the developed digital tools, always following the strictest rules regarding AI defined by the EC. The usage of AI is of limited 
risk in the developed applications based on the EC’s AI risk classification and regulatory framework [3]. It is not expected to 
raise any ethical concerns about human rights and values, or to have any negative impact such as environmental, social, 
political or financial.  
  
[1] Jhon Zysman et. al. (2020); Governing AI: Understanding the Limits, Possibility, and Risks of AI in an Era of 
Intelligent Tools and Systems - Berkley University  
[2] European Commission: High-Level expert group on artificial intelligence, “Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy AI” 
[3] European Commission: Regulatory framework proposal on artificial intelligence  
  
4.2. Compliance with ethical principles and relevant legislations  
  
All the local legislations for virgin raw or secondary materials, waste treatment and digitization will be analyzed and respe cted 
in collaboration with the local authorities and Environmental or other relevant Ministries, in harmony with the respective 
European directives and regulations. W2W will ensure that it is fully compliant with the Do No Significant Harm (DNSH) 
Principle since its activities as well as the expected life cycle impact of the innovations at a commercialization stage, 
substantially contribute in a positive way and/or do not significantly harm any of the six environmental objectives set out in 
Art. 9 and 17 of the EU Sustainable Finance Taxonomy Regulation (EU) 2020/852. W2W will apply a life-cycle oriented 
approach (validated through the utilization of relevant LCA tool when possible) to ensure that proposed solutions are 
sustainable and consisting of 3 steps: i)Identification of actual and potential adverse impacts during the life cycle of the project 
activities ii)Prevention or mitigation of adverse impacts iii)Accounting for how adverse impacts are addressed by tracking 
performance and communicating results. W2W activities are expected to have a direct positive impact to the environmental 
objectives defined: Climate Change Mitigation by reducing GHG emissions (use Recommendation 2013/179/EU or ETSI ES 
203 199,ISO 14067:2018 or ISO 14064-2:2019 to calculate lifecycle GHG and net emissions), to Pollution prevention & 
control through waste reduction and identifying harmless substances and c ontaminants in each pilot, to Transition to Circular 
Economy through the establishment of symbiotic and circular flows within same or different industries for materials and 
wastes whereas is not expected any negative impact to the sustainable use and prote ction of water and marine resources, 
protection and restoration of biodiversity & ecosystems and the Climate Change adaptation. Specifically, W2W will make sure 
that the related DNSH criteria (on Climate Adaption; climate adaptation; water; circular economy; pollution prevention and 
biodiversity) from the EU Taxonomy Compass will be applied for the below project related activities:  
· -Data processing, hosting and related activities  
· -Data-driven ICT solutions for GHG emissions reduction  
· -Computer programming, consultancy and related activities 
· -Close to market research, development and innovation And 
if applicable in the below as well:  
· -Manufacture of aluminium  
· -Manufacture of iron and steel  
· -Manufacture of organic basic chemicals  
· -Manufacture of plastics in primary form  
· -Engineering activities and related technical consultancy dedicated to adaptation to climate change · 
Any other activity that may arise during the project