3.2 CAPACITY OF PARTICIPANTS AND CONSORTIUM AS A WHOLE ................................ ................................ ................ 29 
 
 
GLOSSARY 
AI 
ELH 
ELT 
EOL 
EC 
EU 
FAIR 
GHG 
HMLS 
HSI 
IV 
ICP-MS 
Artificial Intelligence 
End-of-life hose 
End-of-life tyre 
End-of-life 
European Commission 
European Union 
Findable Accessible Interoperable Reusable 
Greenhouse gas 
High-Modulus Low-Shrinkage 
Hyperspectral imaging 
Intrinsic viscosity 
Inductively coupled plasma mass 
spectrometry  
LCA 
LCC 
LIBS 
Mt / kt / t 
NIRS 
PET 
POC 
REF 
SSP 
XRF 
r-PET 
v-PET 
3T 
Life-Cycle Assessment 
Life-Cycle Cost 
Laser Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy 
Million tonnes / kilo tonnes / tonne 
Near Infrared Spectroscopy 
Polyethylene terephthalate 
Proof of concept 
Reference 
Solid state polycondensation 
X-ray Fluorescence 
Recycled Polyethylene terephthalate 
Virgin polyethylene terephthalate 
Tension, Time and Temperature 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
PET is widely used in plastics and textiles leading to over 20 Mt/y of complex waste worldwide  for which no 
closed-loop recycling is viable today . Most complex waste is landfilled or incinerated. There is an urgent need to 
develop a circular solution to convert complex PET wastes from plastics and textiles back into high -added value 
products. 
 
WHITECYCLE unites 3 brand-owners, 1 PET converter, 2 waste managers, 1 digital deeptech for smart sorting, the 
world leading enzymatic recycling SME, 1 LCA company, 3 UNIs/RTOs, 1 cluster and 1 management firm. They 
aim to demonstrate two new processes com bining strong scientific and industrial know -how: (i) innovative 
identification, sorting and separation technologies that will dramatically increase the PET content of complex waste 
streams to 80%, and (ii) a disruptive enzymatic recycling process that is expected to yield pure PET monomers 
sustainably even for impure waste streams. PET monomers obtained will be repolymerised and recycled. Thus, 2 t 
of waste will be used to demonstrate 3 highly technical PET-containing pilot series: 100 tyres, 1,500 m of lay-
flat hoses and 400m2 of multicomponent fabric that will be coated and used to manufacture 4 lines of technical 
garments. Process design kits, LCA and production cost estimates will be provided to PET manufacturers and waste 
management companies for rapid deployment and assure social acceptance. First projections show that 
WHITECYCLE’s recycled PET will be competitive with virgin PET. 
 
The project will conduct a full circle loop from real complex waste feedstock to representative product of the 
3 use-cases at TRL 5. Then, a strong upscale study will allow the process steps to reach TRL 6 to 8. By 2030, 
WHITECYCLE will enable the annual recycling of more than 2 Mt of PET, which corresponds to the amount 
of additional recycled PET needed to meet the EU’s  2030 targets. This will reduce emissions by around 2.06 
Mt CO2eq and avoid the landfilling of more than 1.8 Mt of PET.  
CL6 -2021 -CIRCBIO -01 -04  CONFIDENTIAL  WHITECYCLE  
PART B  3 
1 Excellence
1.1 Objectives and ambition 
1.1.1 General presentation of WHITECYCLE 
The European Commission’s (EC) Circular Economy Action Plan adopt ed in March 2020 has identified plastics as 
among the 7 key product value chains as a priority, given their environmental impacts and circularity potentials. 
Indeed, as the consumption of plastics is expected to double in the coming 20 years, the EC has taken targeted 
measures to address the sustainability challenges posed by this ubiquitous material and will continue to promote a 
concerted approach to tackle plastics pollution at global level. To increase uptake of recycled plastics and contribute 
to the more sustainable use of plastics, the EC has proposed mandatory requirements for recycled content and waste 
reduction measures for key products such as packaging, construction materials and vehicles, also considering the 
activities of the Circular Pla stics Alliance. The European strategy is ambitious, envisioning the redefinition of 
the plastic value chain to make it 100% circular by 2050. It requires ambitious industrial actions coordinated 
at the European level. That’s why WHITECYCLE aims at the industrial-scale implementation 3 very different 
circular value chains by 2030, within 4 years after the project.  
WHITECYCLE particularly addresses the use case of polyethylene Terephthalate (PET), third most used polymer 
in the world with more than 82 Mt produced in 2019 worldwide1 and used in various applications (Figure 1). 
 
Figure 1 : PET amounts in the two targeted applications i.e., plastics and textile in 2019 
If PET recycling processes are commonly implemented for easy-to-collect and pure mono-material products, (7 
Mt of recycled PET (r -PET) produced in 2017 worldwide ), the situation is very different for multi -material 
products and massive volumes of PET waste currently end up landfilled or incinerated without any recycling 
possibility. Indeed, there are no available solutions at the industrial scale, for the recycling or upcycling of these 
complex wastes due to current technical li mitations related to the sorting, separation, and purification processes of 
the retrieved mono -materials. This complex mixed waste stream includes multilayer packaging, multicomponent 
textiles, and composites plastics (i.e., tyres, hoses etc.). In a recent  study, Singh et al. 2 estimated 44 Mt of PET is 
used today in a such complex compositions that it cannot be recycled with classical technologies. In our project, with 
conservative figures, a first estimation of eligible waste feedstock exceeds 20 Mt per year (1.5 Mt end-of-life 
tyres (ELT) and end-of-life hoses (ELH), 13.2 Mt multicomponent clothing, and 3.5 Mt multilayer packaging, 2 Mt 
of other goods and industrial applications). Such large amounts of waste generate soil and water contamination that 
can adversely affect soil and water biodiversity, significant greenhouse gas ( GHG) emissions and many other 
negative impacts on human health. Rethinking the functioning of such a com plex value chain requires efforts by all 
its key players (i.e., plastics and textiles producers, end-users, recyclers, retailers, consumers) to drive investment in 
the right direction. 
The objective of WHITECYCLE is to overcome the barrier posed by feedstock complexity via a set of versatile, 
disruptive, and fully scalable technological processes (mechanical, physico -chemical, and enzymatic) capable of 
infinitely retrieving and recycling PET, even from complex mixed waste  to yield pure, industrially relevan t 
monomer at any scale. WHITECYCLE includes a clear plan for replication of the technologies to be implemented at 
the industrial scale (i.e., > TRL8) beyond the project, across a wide range of sectors implementing or manufacturing 
PET-containing products. Information recorded in detail and in standardized ways (using FAIR data principles) will 
enable interoperability among the components, transparency of the processes involved, and the reuse in similar 
contexts as well as new, innovative ones (data as an asset). 
The main project outcomes will be: 
• 3 industrially viable circular value chains from bin to highly technical products namely tyres, lay-flat hoses, and 
multicomponent textiles at TRL 6 or above for the different steps (recognition, sorting, enzymatic 
depolymerization, purification, monomer reuse). 
• Comprehensive LCA, LCC, social acceptability studies and FAIR data for each of the 3 use-cases  
• Agreements for upscaling and implementation from 12 brand-owners, 3 PET manufacturers and 3 waste managers 
/ recycling equipment manufacturers 
 
1 IHS Markit 2020 
2 Singh et al., Techno-economic, life cycle, & socioeconomic impact analysis of enzymatic recycling of PET, Joule (2021), 
doi.org/10.1016/j.joule.2021.06.015 
PET WORLDWIDE 82 Mt, 2019
61% TEXTILESPLASTICS 39%
33 Mt IN CLOTHING 16 Mt IN OTHER APPLICATIONS
carpets, 
non woven textiles, 
geotextiles etc.
23 Mt IN PACKAGING 10 Mt IN END-PRODUCTS
19.8 Mt
100% PET
13.2 Mt
Multicomponent
clothings
3.5 Mt 
multilayer 
packaging
6 Mt 
opaque  
bottles
13.5 Mt clear 
bottles
3 Mt tyres, 
hoses & 
rubber goods
7 Mt other goods -
electronic, acoustic & 
insulation
CL6 -2021 -CIRCBIO -01 -04  CONFIDENTIAL  WHITECYCLE  
PART B  4 
1.1.2 USE-CASE #1: PET IN TYRES AND REINFORCED RUBBER GOODS 
Tyre manufacturers must find solutions at the EU scale to produce 
sustainable tyres, si nce natural resources are decreasing, while waste is 
increasing. ELT are non-biodegradable wastes, generated in large amounts 
all over the world 3. Worldwide, 1.6 billion new passenger car tyres are 
sold each year4 representing 11 Mt of ELT.  
Tyres are the only parts of the car that touch the road. They must strike a 
balance between safety, traction, durability, energy efficiency and 
manufacturing cost. Due to these competing needs, t yres are made of very 
complex composites that perform in harsh conditions. Figure 2 depicts the 
overall structure of a passenger car tyre.  Tyre is made up of elastomers  
(natural & synthetic rubber), filler (carbon black & silica), reinforcement 
material (metals & PET textiles based on highly technical fibre), plasticizers 
and other chemicals. Some fractions are currently very well retrieved such 
as rubber and metal, but the embedded textile part composed of the carcass 
plies (thin textile PET fibre cords bonded into the rubber) and the cap plies 
made of PET, polyamide or hybrid polyamide/aramid is not. In addition, 
the textile acts as a pollutant for compounds and metals valorisation. 
PET for tyre cords represents 7  % of ELT mass or 800 kt worldwide 
per year (greatest application for industrial polyester fibres (3 Mt).  
In Europe about 3.4 Mt/year of ELT are treated to recover materials or to 
produce energy 5. Of these, 47 % of collected ELT are shredded. This 
shredding process outputs a stream of dirty fibrous t extile (about 20 % of 
the total volume of shredded ELT, i.e., 320 kt/year). The recovered dirty 
fibrous textile represents a special waste 6 (see Figure 3), containing PET, 
that must be disposed of and mostly used in cement -plant for energy 
recovery. The dirty fibrous textile contains approximately 50 % of rubber 
particles, 37 % PET, 13 % other fibres. In Europe, it represents a feedstock 
of 250 kt of waste PET if all ELT were shredded to produce secondary raw 
material.  
With an expected yield of 80 %, WHITECYCLE aims to recover 200 kt/y of PET in EU and 640 kt worldwide. 
Tyre manufacturers have been able to use r -PET from mechanical recycling, but it needs very selected feedstock of 
clear bottles which waste volumes will be inadequate for large scale use.  Sorting and processing PET from ELT 
remain an ambitious goal due to the complexity of tyre structures and to the lack of available technologies to address 
PET composite recycling. The technologies developed within WHITECYCLE for tyre recycling could be applied to 
many other specific rubber goods associating polymeric matrix and PET fibres like in belts, and seals. 
Given their strict technical specifications , complexity, and massive volume of PET from tyre waste, tyres 
represent a very impactful use-case for PET enzymatic recycling with already available waste. The goal is to 
recycle PET from tyres into new tyres in an infinite circular loop. 
1.1.3 USE-CASE #2: PET IN MULTICOMPONENT CLOTHING TEXTILES 
The circular economy has become a major preoccupation for the textile industry during the last years. Consumer 
expectations about transparency, material origin and production conditions are increasing, pushing the indust ry to 
operate rapid, drastic, and sustainable changes particularly regarding end-of-life (EOL) clothing. Clothing textiles 
are the fourth highest-pressure category for the use of primary raw materials and water, after food, housing, 
and transport, and fifth for GHG emissions7. By 2025, the separate collection of textile waste will be compulsory 
in Europe8. There is thus a need for technologies to enable the circular reuse of this resource.  
Recycling technologies are being developed, offering great perspe ctives for the industry  (for instance, sorting 
technologies, mostly based on Near InfraRed Spectroscopy NIR S). However, they often rely on a mono -material, 
mono-colour, mono-layer feedstock which is not representative of collected clothing feedstock.  
 
3 Marco Marconi et al. / Procedia CIRP 69 (2018) 944 – 949 
4 https://www.statista.com/statistics/625275/global-tyre-market-volume/ 
5 EASME. Recycling rubber to reduce noise, 2015, https://ec.europa.eu/easme/en/news/recycling-rubber-reduce-noise. 
6 European Waste Catalogue – EWC code 19.12.08 
7 EEA Briefing report Nov 2019. 
8 https://ec.europa.eu/info/news/new-waste-rules-will-make-eu-global-front-runner-waste-management-and-recycling-2018-apr-18_en 
Figure 2 : Main elements of a tyre 
Figure 3 : Dirty fibrous content from 
ELT 
CL6 -2021 -CIRCBIO -01 -04  CONFIDENTIAL  WHITECYCLE  
PART B  5 
Indeed, most clothing textiles are multi -material, and multicolour, making their identification quite complex 
(Figure 4). Such feedstock is mostly landfilled, and their sorting remain an enormous issue. Multilayer textile 
clothing can be classified into different categories: 
• Layers assembled with a seam or lasers including: 
o Suits, dresses, or cloth with a lining: once the garment is 
cut into pieces of 10x10cm most of the pieces are 
separated and can be considered monolayer 
o Winter jackets and cold protection including padding. 
Different layers assembled with multiple seams or lasers. 
Even when being cut most of the pieces will remain 
assembled together with at least 3 layers 
• Layers that have been pasted on the whole surface. Only 
a chemical reaction can separate these layers 
o Coated textile 
o Textile laminated with a membrane 
The proportion of multilayer textile clothing among the 
multicomponent textile feedstock is precisely unknown at this 
stage as no recent study of characterisation of the specific 
feedstock have been run. Indeed, given the complexity of these 
piece, they are not recyclable at this stage and are mostly landfilled. An estimate can however by done, based on the 
type of clothing. Jacket, outdoor and sport clothing, rain and cold protection clothing and a large part of professional 
clothing are multilayer, which could represent 40 % of the textile feedstock, i.e., 1 3.2 Mt of PET containing  
multilayer textile clothing. 
Based on production figures, it is reasonable to assume that on average, the chemical composition clothing textile 
waste is made of 50 % of PET which corresponds to a feedstock of approximately 33 Mt. 
In the EU, a study published in 2019 showed that an average of 26  kg of textile was purchased per inhabitant and 
11kg was discarded  9. In 2030, with a considered waste textile feedstock based on 26kg and a population of 447 
million, a 50 % content in PET and a 40 % multicomponent fraction, it gives 2.3 Mt usable feedstock in the EU.  
WHITECYCLE targets the production of 1.85 Mt of r-PET coming from today’s landfilled multicomponent 
textile waste. The future tools to recognize and sort could also be used in other fields such as multilayer packaging 
recycling. 
1.1.4 USE-CASE #3: PET IN LAY-FLAT HOSES 
The circular economy is still not a focus area in lay-flat hose 
production and use. The competition is focused on price and 
quality, not environmental impacts, like CO2 footprint. Hoses 
are treated as disposables with few eco-considerations 
imposed by  regulations or customers. WHITECYCLE will 
take an important role in changing this , and MANDALS 
wishes to be the first lay-flat hose producer in the world offering hoses made from recycled materials (see Figure 5). 
A lay-flat hose consists in a PET-based weave that is totally embedded into thermoplastics or rubber material . The 
weave determines the strength of the hose, the outer layer protects the weave from abrasion, cuts, chemicals and UV, 
and the inside layer provides a leak -tight barrier for the fluid transported. MANDALS co -invented, produces, and 
sells a significant volume of the circular looms needed to produce lay -flat hoses. We estimate 1,500 circular looms 
worldwide. Based on this, we believe about 120 kt/year of hose is produced where 25 w% is PET, and that a 
similar weight is transformed to waste each year. 
For these 3 streams, WHITECYCLE targets to transform 2.56 Mt of EU mostly landfilled PET waste into 
2.06 Mt of r-PET: 200 kt PET coming from waste tyres, 1.85 Mt kt from PET multicomponent clothing waste 
and 10 kt from hoses with a yield of 80 %. It will demonstrate the viability of the innovative technologies on 
currently non-valorised and available complex feedstocks. 
1.1.5 Overall and specific objectives along with associated KPIs 
The overall objectives of the WHITECYCLE project are to develop a full, flexible, infinitely circular PET value 
chain based on a white technology, namely, enzymatic depolymerization where the enzyme is a biological catalyst 
with high substrate specificity operating in environmentally friendly conditions. The project aims at demonstrating 
 
 
Figure 4 : Clothing shreds 
Figure 5 : A lay-flat hose 
COATED TEXTILE
PADDING IN THE 
SEAM
SEPARATED 
PADDING
MEMBRANE TEXTILE
CL6 -2021 -CIRCBIO -01 -04  CONFIDENTIAL  WHITECYCLE  
PART B  6 
the relevance of r-PET in the high-specification applications with positive effects on environment. The project 
will provide: 
Original processes:  
• New recognition and sorting technologies applied to two feedstocks: multi layer clothing and complex plastics 
(ELT, ELH) to maximize the PET fraction entering the enzymatic recycling process. 
• Amorphization technology of semi-crystalline PET from complex waste which is key for any enzymatic process. 
• Enzymatic depolymerization technology which enables to efficiently process mixed materials, unlike any existing 
conventional recycling processes limited by the necessary high purity level of their waste feedstocks. 
• Purification of PET monomers coming from complex waste to manage high technical grade PET production. 
During the project, the targeted yields for these first steps are respectively 90  %, 95  % and 80  %. After full 
industrialization the whole recovery targeted yield is 80 % regarded the targeted feedstock. 
High-specifications application use cases:  
• Tyres (TRL8): Pre-industrial scale manufacturing and testing of r-PET containing tyres (pilot series of 100). 
• Hoses (TRL6): Pilot-scale manufacturing and testing of r-PET containing lay-flat hoses (1,500 m). 
• Clothing (TRL6): Pre-industrial scale manufacturing of r -PET containing multicomponent garments (4 lines of 
clothing items) 
Systemic circular economic approach, dissemination, communication, replication and social acceptance:  
• Optimise circularity through the limitation of pollution and consumption of water, energy in the circular value -
chain. 
• Evaluate the life-cycle economic and environmental KPIs of the complete circular solution. 
• Demonstrate the viability of project technologies with at least 4 additional brand-owners beyond the consortium 
during the project to enable the rapid adoption in additional sectors. 
• Prepare the future commercialisation of developed technologies for broad-scale replication. 
• Document processes and procedures along the entire supply chain with the FAIR data implementation protocol. 
• Anchor concepts for sustainable industrial transformation, which foster social inclusion and transparency along 
with economic sustainability, while minimizing adverse impacts on the environment and society. 
OBJECTIVE 1: To sort and separate PET from multilayer waste feedstocks  - MICHELIN, ESTATO, 
SYNERGIES, PPRIME, IRIS 
PET sorting methods will be adapted to the complex waste feedstocks. Different processing technologies will be 
implemented towards ELT and clothing waste (i.e., combination of recognition, mechanical, aerodynamic, and 
electrostatic methods) to reach 80 % PET content from fibres/rubber mixes and multilayer textile clothing.  
Regarding ELT and ELH waste stream, a lab-scale unit will be optimised to run by PPRIME to produce 1.5 t of 
PET fibres  Then, a pre -industrial unit will be built, installed, and tested at ESTATO’s facilities with sorting 
capabilities of up to 5 t of PET fibres a day. 
Regarding clothing waste stream, an optical and photonic based pilot unit system for polymer recognition will be 
developed and built by IRI S and used by SYNERGIES to manually sort multilayer clothing items according to 
their composition to allow the constitution of a usable feedstock of 80 % of PET content. Then, an automatic inline 
pre-industrial optical and photonic polymers recognition pilot unit will be developed and built by IRIS, adapted, 
and tested on the existing industrial monolayer textile waste sorting line at SYNERGIES. The sorting capability 
of this pre-industrial unit will be up to 20 kt of textile waste a year 
KPI 
• KPI #1.1: Automated demonstrator units for the efficient separation of PET fibres from composites (ELT , 
ELH) and multilayer (clothing) with more than 80% of PET and no metallic parts.  
o Regarding ELT: 150 kg sorted ELT at M13, 1.5 t at M27 (TRL6).  
o Regarding clothing: 50 kg sorted multilayer clothing textile at M17, 0.5 t at M27 (TRL6). 
• KPI #1.2 : Yield of 90% of PET recovered c ompared to total PET in ELT and complex clothing with 
significant PET content. 
 
OBJECTIVE 2: To pre-treat separated PET waste - MICHELIN, IFTH 
Enzymatic depolymerization requires a low crystallinity level (< 15%)  and high specific area to exhibit excellent 
monomer recovery yield. WP2 focuses on implementing first, a pilot -scale and second, a pre -industrial pre -
treatment process of PET complex waste to reduce the crystallinity of concentrated PET feedstocks enabling 
enzymatic depolymerization Various physico -chemical principles for heating, and cooling will be explored to 
determine the best combination of processes (e.g., extrusion, radiation, quenching , activated gas, micronisation  
etc.) to provide WP3 with pre-treated PET waste. 
KPI • KPI #2.1: Pre-treated PET waste < 15 % crystallinity: analytical 100kg (M12), 1 t (M28, TRL6). 
• KPI #2.2: Yield of PET recovered compared to total PET >95%. 
 
CL6 -2021 -CIRCBIO -01 -04  CONFIDENTIAL  WHITECYCLE  
PART B  7 
OBJECTIVE 3: To recover purified monomers from complex PET at pilot scale and to recover purified 
monomers from high PET content waste at pre-industrial scale – CARBIOS, MICHELIN 
To perform the enzymatic depolymerization of PET contained in composite textile waste and complex textile clothing 
waste at pilot scale and develop a purification process suitable to produce high purity monomers from the low PET 
content waste feedstocks containing diverse impurities (obtain the same quality as virgin monomers). To produce 
2 t of purified monomers from high PET content waste at preindustrial scale (2t/week). 
KPI 
• KPI #3.1: 80% PET depolymerization in 24h at lab scale (50 g, TRL4, from ELT M12, clothing M15)  
• KPI #3.2: To produce recycled monomers with a purity comparable to those of petrochemical monomers 
100kg in M19 for ELT feedstock and 100kg in M22 from clothing waste feedstock (TRL 6). 
• KPI #3.3: To assess best end-of life options for impurities filtered out of the reaction mixture at demo-scale 
(MICHELIN)(TRL6) 
• KPI #3.4: To produce 1-2 t of purified monomers from high PET content waste M22 (TRL 7) 
 
OBJECTIVE 4: To produce high technical PET fibrous materials - IFTH, KORDSA, DITF 
To perform polycondensation and solid-state polymerization (SSP) on recycled monomer to obtain low and high 
molecular weight r-PET polymer with similar properties as virgin ones. To perform high speed spinning to produce 
textile yarn and high modulus low shrinkage yarn (HMLS). To perform twisting and dipping on high performance 
yarn to prepare tyre cords. 
KPI 
• KPI #4.1: Polycondensation and SSP of r-PET (160kg M26, 1800kg M27)  
• KPI #4.2: Production of technical yarn (130kg of yarn M28, 800kg of HMLS yarn M30) 
• KPI #4.3: Production of tyre cord (50kg single end cord M28, 600kg dipped fabrics M34) 
 
OBJECTIVE 5: To produce at pre -industrial level r-PET containing tyres, garments, and lay-flat hoses - 
MICHELIN, MANDALS, INDITEX 
Demonstrating in relevant industrial conditions the recyclability of PET from complex waste to challenging PET 
application, as tyres, technical hoses, and clothing with quality equivalent to those made with virgin PET (v-PET).  
The demonstration will prove , in a first phase targeting TRL5  on prototype processes , that r-PET is a relevant 
product for a high technical application: tyre (25 pilot tyres produced to check safety and performances ), lay flat 
hoses (production and testing of 25 m hose where at least  40% or v-PET is replaced by r -PET) and suitable for 
commodity application such as garment field (20 m² multicomponent fabric produced to check feasibility, and 
performances). In the second phase, scale -up feasibility on industrial representative facilitie s will be evaluated  
(100 tyres, TRL8, 1,500 meters hoses, TRL6, 400 m2 coated fabric and 4 lines of garments, TRL6) 
KPI 
• KPI #5.1: Recycled PET tyre fabrication: 100 r-PET car passenger pilot tyres and tests – M45 
• KPI #5.2: Recycled PET hose fabrication: 1,500 meter lay flat hose and tests – M45 
• KPI #5. 3: Recycled PET clothing fabrication: 400 m2 multicomponent coated fabrics + 4 lines of 
garments and tests – M45 
 
OBJECTIVE 6: To quantify the impact for sustainability dimensions for the use cases and implement the 
FAIR data protocol & prototyping for broader reuse - ERASME, HVL, IPOINT, all. 
The impact of use cases regard ing social, economic, and environmental dimensions is quantified and qualified 
with assessment methods that evaluate the entire supply chain (social LCA). All project data is handled by a FAIR 
data protocol. A prototype is made available for reuse in a simila r industrial context.  The protocol supports 
communication, dissemination, and exploitation of project results within and beyond WHITECYCLE. 
KPI • KPI #6.1: 1 LCA + LCC per use case (with a focus on quantifying environmental impacts) 
• KPI #6.2: 1 Social impact quantification/qualification per use case (incl. social acceptance analysis) 
 
OBJECTIVE 7  : To transfer project results and collaborate with at least 18 companies beyond the 
consortium who will replicate circular recycling and production in many applications - AXELERA, all. 
Material transfer agreements and specific agreements will be signed with  at least 12 brand owners beyond the 
consortium who will use r -PET from the project to replicate circular production use case, using budgets beyond 
the project. Similarly,  the full process design package will be prepared for at least 3 PET manufacturers fo r 
enzymatic recycling. Likewise, agreements will be signed with at least 3 waste producers and/or recycling 
equipment producers to test their feedstocks and to adopt WHITECYCLE sorting and separation technologies. For 
more details, see section 2. The FAIR data reference implementation file will be developed into a blueprint for 
FAIRification of data in related industries (to the level of machine-actionability). 
KPI 
• KPI #7.1: 12 brand-owners, 3 PET manufacturers, and 3 large-scale waste managers sign an agreement 
to test, upscale and/or deploy WHITECYCLE solutions 
• KPI #7.2: 1 use case with a prototype for an industrial FAIR data protocol is uploaded for reuse to the 
European Open Science Cloud. 
CL6 -2021 -CIRCBIO -01 -04  CONFIDENTIAL  WHITECYCLE  
PART B  8 
1.1.6 List of key technologies and their progresses in terms of TRL during the project 
At the project, the TRLs of the breakthrough processes proposed will be advanced, and these new ecotechnologies 
will be de-risked in the eyes of companies who will be eager to adopt and upscale them, as presented below. 
Key techno. Justifications 
Sorting system for 
PET in ELT and 
ELH 
TRL3 
  TRL6 
A set of vibratory, aerodynamic, and electrostatic separator devices already  individually available will 
be combined at lab scale to assess the sorting of the PET textile fraction from ELT shreds. Based on the 
results, modifications and enhancements to the whole process will be carried out to settle a new pre -
industrial-scale process. Pre-industrial unit will be built to target a 500  t/y separation of PET 
containing fabric from post-consumer ELT shred waste streams. 
Sorting system for 
PET contained in 
clothing shreds 
TRL3 
  TRL6 
IRIS will design and develop a novel recognition monitoring system based on different technologies 
used successively: characterization, feedstock processing, optical/photonic and automatic sorting 
technologies, with the aim of separating among the multilayered waste according to their composition, 
to constitute a stock containing more than 80% of PET content. After validation on off-line sorting (0.5t 
produced), the automatization of the processes and use of smart algorithms will guarantee a high speed 
of the recognition sorting system. It will be upscaled and adapted to be integrated into SYNERGIES 
automated textile waste sorting centre with the aim of reaching an output of 20 kt/y of clothing 
shreds containing more than an 80% of PET, ready to be further p re-treated before PET 
recycling. 
Pre-treatment 
(amorphization + 
micronisation) 
TRL3 
  TRL6 
Experimental studies based on analytical mixes are done with thermal processes (heating/cooling 
through radiation, extrusion, quenching) and via the activated gas route and micronization. These 
processes are tested at 1 kg scale allowing the identification  of optimised parameters. A first batch at 
lab scale will produce 1 t of pre-treated waste with less than 15 % of crystallinity. A pre-industrial 
unit is then designed and built with a targeted through put of 200 t/y. 
PET enzymatic 
depolymerization 
TRL4 
  TRL7 
CARBIOS will perform depolymerization at laboratory scale (TRL4: 50 g waste in a 500 mL reactor). 
After validation of pre-treatment, scale-up of depolymerization will be performed at pilot scale (TRL 
6: 100 kg of waste in a 1m 3 reactor). The purification p rocess developed for high PET content waste 
will be adapted to low PET content waste and 100 kg of purified monomer will be produced from each 
of both feedstocks. CARBIOS will produce 1-2 t of monomers at the preindustrial unit (TRL 7: 2t/week) 
from high PET content waste. 
Tyres use-case 
TRL5 
  TRL8 
At first, a first close loop on complex waste feedstock will validate the circularity concept. Due to limited 
quantity, pre -industrial/proto equipment will be used to make 25 tyres (spinning, single end cord 
dipping, tyre building).  The second loop based on high PET content waste will allow the use of 
representative industrial apparatus (spinning, dipping, calendaring lines) to build 100 prototype 
tyres to meet TRL8 requirement level. 
Hoses/Garment 
use-cases 
TRL5 
  TRL6 
25 m lay flat hoses building trial will meet TRL6 requirement level . Representative garments will 
be produced at first with 40kg of yarn produced on pre -industrial/proto facilities. The second loop will 
allow the use of full preindustrial condition (TRL6). This experiment will demonstrate relevancy of r -
PET versus hose  (1,500 m  hoses) and garment  (400 m 2 fabric for technical garments  + 4 lines of 
garments) performance requirements.
1.2 Methodology 
1.2.1 Project concept and main activities 
The WHITECYCLE project’s methodology derives from the ambitious idea of turning the whole PET value chain 
into a full circular loop. This implies (i) to demonstrate the overall concept through exchanging materials from 
one process to the next  at TRL5 , and (ii) to at least pre-industrially upscale all the innovative processes 
throughout a circular chain while making them energy and economically efficien t. To serve this purpose, 2  
circular sets of activities are carried out in the project (Figure 6).  
(i) The first set is represented by the 8 disk sections of the inner part, i.e., the 8 pilot-scale processes (TRL3-5). At 
this stage, actual materials will be processed along the circular value chain (PET retrieval from 10 t of ELT and 2  t 
of clothing waste + revalorization it  into 25 prototype tyres, 20 m 2 textile and 25 hoses). (ii) The second sets of 
activities are on the outskirt of the disk and are split in two: the upstream processes will be upscaled as opposed to 
the downstream processes that will be implemented to carry  out PET retrieval and revalorization from 2 t of PET 
bottles into 100 tyres, 1,500 m hoses and 400 m2 of fabric for technical garments that will be used to manufacture 4 
CL6 -2021 -CIRCBIO -01 -04  CONFIDENTIAL  WHITECYCLE  
PART B  9 
lines of garments . On top of this approach, a  comprehensive sustainability analysis o f the loop is implemented 
consisting of characterizing and revalorizing the by-products all along the value chain. 
 
Figure 6 : WHITECYCLE is built around two sets of activities 
At project’s end, the technologies will be sufficiently de-risked in the eyes of industry that the corresponding 
value chains will become circular within 4 years after the project. The methodology is presented in Figure 7.  
 
Figure 7 : Overall concept of the WHITECYCLE project 
1 - 2 - First, IRIS and MICHELIN will define the most appropriate sets of optical technologies (NIIR, LIBS, etc.) to 
be used for the recognition of the chemical composition (i.e., the PET content) of the textile waste. In the meantime, 
SYNERGIES, ESTATO , ITFH will prepar e representative waste samples that will be provided to CARBIOS to 
validate the enzymatic depolymerization process and to develop the monomer purification.  
3 – 4 - 5 - Second, a process pre-upscaling phase will be taking place dealing with (i) developing a PET recognition 
demonstrator device (IRIS) that will be exploited by SYNERGIES for the sorting of multilayer textile wastes, (ii) 
developing the fibre/matrix electrostatic separation demonstrator  (PPRIME & MICHELIN) to retrieve the textile 
PROCESS PRE-
UPSCALING 
ACTIVITIES
From TRL3 to 
TRL5 min.
1 – Chemical
composition
recognition
system for
complex textile
waste feedstock
2 – Fibre / Matrix
separation and
sorting
processes
3 – PET
amorphization
process
8 MONTHS
PRELIMINARY 
ACTIVITIES
1 - Methodology
development to
characterize key
materials in
waste feedstocks
2 – Production
of representative
waste feedstock
samples for
enzymatic
depolymerization
optimization
4 MONTHS
FULL LOOP IMPLEMENTATION
TRL5
15 MONTHS
GRANULATED 
ELT
SORTED 
TEXTILE
AMORPHOUS 
PET
MONOMERS 
TA EG
COMPLEX 
TEXTILE 
SORTED
SHAPED 
TEXTILE
10 t
2 t
1 t
200 kg
PET yarns for 
clothing 
PET yarns for 
tyres + hoses
PET POLYMERS
160 kg
65 kg 65 kg
Weaved fabric Twisted yarn
Dipped cords
40 kg
40 kg
25 proto 
tyres +
25 m hoses
20m2 multilayer 
clothing fabric
END OF LIFE
à WASTE COLLECTION
Revalorized
Reused 
elsewhere
UPSTREAM PROCESSES TRL INCREASE
TRL6/8
DOWNSTREAM PROCESSES TRL 
INCREASE + TESTS ON ACTUAL PET 
CONTAINING WASTE MATERIALS 
TRL6/8
Granulating
Fibre / matrix sorting
Complex sorting
Textile preparation
Amorphization
15 MONTHS
Polycondensation 
/ SSP
Depolymerization
+ purification of 
PET clear bottles
Spinning
4 lines of 
GarmentsWeaving
100 Tyres 
Spinning
Twisting 
& dipping
2 t
0.5 t
SEPT. 
2022 
(M5)
MAY 
2023 
(M13)
AUG. 
2024 
(M28)
DEC. 
2025 
(M43)
MAY 
2022
(M1)
2 t
20 kg
1.8 t
150 kg
700 kg
By-products 
revalorization
1500m
hoses
CL6 -2021 -CIRCBIO -01 -04  CONFIDENTIAL  WHITECYCLE  
PART B  10 
fraction from ELT shreds and (iii) developing the PET amorphization process (IFTH). At this stage, these processes 
will reach TRL5 and be ready for the full loop activities. 
6 – Third, demonstration activities will be carried out at TRL5 involving all the partners of the WHITECYCLE value 
chain. 2 t of textiles waste and 10 t of granulated ELT and ELH will be sorted, shaped, and prepared to ultimately 
increase the PET concentratio n of both waste streams, reaching up to 80%. Both streams will be amorphized, 
micronized (IFTH and MICHELIN) and depolymerized (CARBIOS) leading to the retrieval of up to 200 kg of 
monomers. Then, DITF will oversee the production of 160 kg of polymers: 
1. The high intrinsic viscosity IV (0.95) r-PET polymers will be further processed through spinning (IFTH), dipping, 
twisting (KORDSA) to ultimately be implemented in the production of 25 tyres (MICHELIN). Yarns will be also 
processed by MANDALS to make 25m of hoses 
2. The Low IV (0.65) r-PET will be further processed through spinning and weaving (IFTH) to manufacture 20 m2 
of multicomponent clothing fabric (INDITEX). 
7 – The activities will be decoupled as follow: 
• ON THE UPSTREAM PROCESSES : Upstream processes TRL increase to reach 6 to 8 without exchange of 
materials from one process to the next. Upscaled processes validation. 
• ON THE DOWNSTREAM PROCESSES: Downstream processes TRL increase to reach 6 to 8 with an exchange 
of material from one process to the next, starting from the enzymatic depolymerization. Indeed, CARBIOS will 
depolymerize 2 t of clear PET bottles and the resulting monomers will be further processed by the partners (IFTH, 
DITF, KORDSA) to retrieve 450 kg of cords for garments and lay -flat hoses and 700 kg of dipped fabrics for 
tyres. MICHELIN will manufacture and test 100 tyres, MANDALS will manufacture 1,500 m lay-flat hoses, and 
INDITEX will weave 400 m2 coated/multicomponent fabric and manufacture 4 lines of technical garments. 
1.2.2 Main challenges related to the chosen methodology 
1.2.2.1 ELT sorting and separation of textile fibres 
Main issues: End of Life Tyre (ELT) shredding generates large masses of a dirty textile mixture of rubber and fibrous 
materials. Today it is mainly incinerated for energy recovery, sometimes with some added value for  cement plants. 
The use as a secondary raw material is very limited. The main issues are: (i) the complexity of this feedstock 
containing non-magnetic flying fibres and rubber dust, and (ii) the lack of efficient sorting systems dedicated 
to this composite. 
State-of-the-Art: Dirty textile is composed of a mix of equal part s of rubber and fibrous materials. Clean textile is 
composed of 75 % of PET fibres. Shredding tyres generate different types of products. 
• Shredded parts, over 20 mm and bigger chips which include textile10 and sometimes tyre steel parts. 
• Rubber granulates or chips, from less than 1 mm to 20 mm 
which are sorted from dirty textile fibres11.  
In the field of ELT shredding, through continuous granulating process 
(grinding or knife cutting), Eddy current is used to separate metallic 
parts from polymeric parts, sieving is used to separate the different 
rubber parts regarding their size. Finally, airflow/cyclone effect is used 
to remove the flying particles (rubber dust and fibrous elements). 
Several downcycling strategies have been studied: expansive soils, 
geopolymer concrete, but without traction. Within REFIBRE 
European LIFE project a process to clean textile fibres up to 99% was 
mentioned, coupled with a compacting operation, toward bituminous 
conglomerates and plastic compounds applications. The 
WHITECYCLE project will position itself as logical successor of 
REFIBRE but focused on technolo gy allowing circular economy ad 
infinitum. The first stage is the constitution of high -rate PET fibres 
feedstock which is a challenge due to their low difference in mass and 
density (1.2 for rubber vs 1.35 for PET), no magnetic effect, very small 
pieces (< 20 µm fibres) and dark colour due to rubber . No solutions 
are available. 
Background: PPRIME is specialized in applied electrostatics 
research and has conducted extensive work on electrostatic 
separation of granular or micronized plastics. Dascalescu repor ted ability to separate granular plastic using tribo -
aero-electrostatic separator in the context of waste of electric and electronic equipment (WEEE)12 as seen on Figure 
 
10Aliapur powergom  technical sheet, Aliapur geogom  technical sheet 
11  Aliapur technigom  technical sheet 
12 Tribo-aero-electrostatic Separator for Coarse Granular Insulating Materials M. Miloudi, L. Dascalescu, et al, 2013 
Figure 8 : System developed by PPRIME to 
sort ABS/HIPS mixes from WEEE 
CL6 -2021 -CIRCBIO -01 -04  CONFIDENTIAL  WHITECYCLE  
PART B  11 
8. PPRIME also report s combination of shredding and tribo -electrostatic separation 13 . PPRIME has 6 
experimental installations to study tribo-aero-electrostatic phenomena. This valuable knowledge  will be applied to 
purify the textile fraction of ELT shreds. MICHELIN and PPRIME carried out encouraging pre-studies leading 
to feasibility at 100 g scale of sorting fibrous content from rubber dust. 
Beyond State -of-the-Art: The project will bring a totally new combination of technologies (shredding, sieving, 
tribo-aero-electrostatic process) to sort PET fibrous part from shred. Hence, the project will reach lab  scale and 
consequently pilot-scale tests. 
1.2.2.2 Post-consumer clothing PET recognition, sorting and separation 
Main issues: Nowadays, a relevant part of used and new textiles ends up in landfills, although partial recycling of 
the materials would be possible. To do so, it is necessary to know the exact composition of the materials and sort 
them according to their nature . Composition recognition based on the cloth label tag is not reliable and take too 
much time to be cost efficient. The sorting needs to be automated. If surface detection technologies are promising 
for monolayer textile recognition, th ey are not suitable for multilayer  as they can only identify one side of the 
textile.  
State-of-the-Art: There are already some methods available for material identification that bring accurate results 
(differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), gas or liquid chromatography, inductively coupled plasma mass 
spectrometry (ICP-MS), X-ray fluorescence (XRF) etc. Ne vertheless, they are offline lab  methods and not suitable 
for automated industrial inline identification. Currently, manual methods are applied. However, its application is 
limited, because staff cannot sort different materials with the required velocity and accuracy, and the exact 
composition of textiles cannot be identified manually given the large rage of existing blends. 
In this sense, N ear InfraRed spectroscopy (NIRS) is widely used in waste industry. During past years technologies 
providers identified the textile as a potential market for their application and started to adapt them. Valvan balding 
system developed the Fibresort technology 14 to sort monolayer complete cloths. Recently Tomra Sorting system 
announced the launch of new industrial textile sorting plant in collaboration with Stadler 15. Here again only mono 
layer can be identified. These technolo gies bring some limitations for multi -layered, black, or complex textile. 
Consequently, it is necessary to bring additional techniques to be used in combination. 
Background: IRIS has a large experience  in developing fast, customized, online cutting -edge ph otonic-based 
solutions for different inline and real-time processing monitoring focused on Vis-NIR and SWIR spectroscopy 
and other techniques (Hyperspectral imaging (HSI), Laser Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy (LIBS), etc.) , 
coupled with advanced chemometrics analysis and Industrial Artificial Intelligence Solutions (e.g., machine 
learning). IRIS add high values for driving improved process quality and efficiency in the identification of the 
substances and the processability of the information. These tools have been proven to be accurate in identifying the 
composition of materials in mono and multi-component flows. Specifically, IRIS’ results in the Multicycle16 project 
for the plastic waste sector showed the viability of using NIR-HSI to identify the different layers in laminated plastic 
packaging films, including PET, and showed the feasibility of solutions like LIBS for black plastic and complex 
materials to overcome the limitations of Vis-NIR and SWIR-HSI17. In textiles, IRIS has already applied HSI for the 
determination of concentration of a medical active compound on wound textiles  or CN-NL nanoparticles in novel 
textile18. 
MICHELIN has implemented Terahertz technology to determine nature and thickness of multimix compounds. 
SYNERGIES is setting  up an innovative industrial plant for dismantling and sorting monolayer textiles . To 
do so, Synergies is involved in several research projects aiming to design this innovative project by working with the 
equipment provided on the modifications needed on their existing equipment’s to answers textile needs. 
Beyond State-of-the-Art: WHITECYCLE will envisage to develop a recognition system for PET contained in multi-
layered or coated clothing shreds based on the material composition identification to define the respective recycling 
route and separat e them from non -recyclable parts. The final recognition prototype will encompass Vis -NIR and 
SWIR-HSI and LIBS technology with Artificial Intelligence (AI) Solutions (e.g., machine learning) to define fast 
and accurate models to elaborate data and provide real -time identification of multi-layer textile clothing. Both soft 
and hardware will be optimized, and their application extended to operate at inline mod e in SYNERGIES’ waste 
clothing textile facility and be in communication with existing sorting equipment providing the compositional 
information. The AI solution will be plugged on the RECYCLE platform that is developed by Refashion. 
 
13 Shredding as simultaneous size-reduction and tribo-charging operation, Particulate Science and Technology, 2019, Dascalescu et al. 
14 http://www.valvan.com/products/equipment-for-used-clothing-wipers/sorting-equipment/fibresort/ 
15https://recycling.tomra.com/blog/tomra-and-stadler-deliver-the-worlds-first-fully-automated-textile-sorting-plant 
16 H2020 MULTICYCLE Advanced & sustainable recycling processes and valuechains for plastic-based multi-materials (SPIRE 820695). 
17Araujo-Andrade C, Bugnicourt E, Philippet L, et al. Review on the photonic techniques suitable for automatic monitoring of the composition of multi-materials 
wastes Waste Management & Research. 2021;39(5):631-651. doi:10.1177/0734242X21997908 
18 https://www.mdpi.com/2079-4983/11/2/32 
CL6 -2021 -CIRCBIO -01 -04  CONFIDENTIAL  WHITECYCLE  
PART B  12 
1.2.2.3 Sorted PET waste pre-treatment 
Main issues : The depolymerization process needs a high 
content of PET: 
1. with an amorphous microstructure to allow the active 
site of the enzyme to fully shape polymer molecules and 
catalyse the hydrolysis of ester bonds  
2. available for the enzyme (not coated by extra -materials) 
with high specific area and wettability 
Composite materials and especially technical ones present the 
highest challenge regarding those two points. In hoses, tyres and 
some technical garments, the PET used ar e highly crystalline 
(crystalline rate  > 40%) and v ery high intrinsic viscosity 
(IV>0.8dL/g). The multilayers and composites in the use -cases targeted long -life products so adhesion need to be 
strong between fibres and matrix (Figure 9).  
State-of-the-Art: The introduction of white chemistry, and specifically enzymatic catalysis increases the need for 
amorphous organic microstructure. It is reported in other fields such as polysaccharide pre -treatment to allow 
enzymatic modification (Dome19). As described by Singh et al.20 one main issue is to define an efficient pre-treatment 
amorphization process. The process of amorphization of an organic structure is not very developed. Two major 
ways can be chosen to reduce the crystallinity of a structure.  The first is a thermal route (Figure 8) with heating 
above the melting temperature (through extrusion or oven) followed by a rapid cooling or “quenching” preventing 
the polymer from crystallizing. For all thermal ro utes, the extra -material could highly interfere through melting, 
degrading. A second route is radiation or activated gases of low or high energy. The morphologic changes induced 
in macromolecular materials resulting from scission, recombination may lead to various amorphization phenomena. 
The increase of surface area is more known with micronization approach or generation of high aspect ratio objects 
(fibres, foams). 
Background: CARBIOS has developed a pre -treatment process for high PET content plastic wast e to TRL 6 to 
decrease its crystallinity and increase its specific surface area 21. It consists in an extrusion of PET flakes, followed 
by a quick cooling and micronization or extrusion expansion in one step.22 This process is inadequate for PET waste 
containing a high level of extra material generate heavy fumes. MI CHELIN has developed different treatments to 
modify the surface energy of tyre cords, and among these, plasma treatment was proven to amorphize t extile 
surface23.  
IFTH possesses important lab scale range of processes to shape fibrous material into non -woven product, conduct 
treatment on polymer to modify microstructure (thermal stabilization, extrusion) or enhance wettability (gas, plasma) 
Beyond State-of-the-Art: Different technical paths will be developed by MICHELIN and IFTH with thermal 
or activated gas routes to reach amorphous PET with high specific surface, in presence of remaining 
impurities. The best way to conduct polymer pre-treatment will be implemented to preindustrial scale of 20 kg/h use 
(TRL 6) and evaluated through LCA. 
1.2.2.4 Enzymatic PET depolymerization and monomer purification 
Main issues: The recycling of complex waste such as composite plastic waste or complex clothing waste is 
limited by: 
• Quantity of impurities (colorants, pigments, rubber, elastane, cotton, coating…).  
• Low PET content high intrinsic viscosity (IV) of 0.95 dL/g of PET in the composite (ELT, ELH). 
The recycling of such waste requires a process able to: 
• Depolymerize very selectively PET into monomers without reacting with impurities 
• Efficiently purify the monomers from the mixture to obtain purity equivalent to oil-based monomers. 
State-of-the-Art: Today, mechanical recycling that consists in melting and mechanical filtration of the PET waste, 
is the only solution developed in Europe at industrial scale to recycle PET. This process does not allow the removal 
of impurities from the waste feedstocks inducing major limitations: coloured waste can only  be recycled for darker 
applications, only extra pure inlet waste can be treated to target demanding (high IV) applications, limited number 
of recycling loops.  
 
19 Changes in the crystallinity degree of starch having different types of crystal structure after mechanical pre-treatment, K. Dome &all, Polymers, 
2020,12,641 
20 Singh et al., Techno-economic, life-cycle, & socioeconomic impact analysis of enzymatic recycling of PET, Joule (2021), 
doi.org/10.1016/j.joule.2021.06.015 
21 WO2017198786A1 
22 WO 2021/123299, WO 2021/123301 
23 FR2991344, FR2996806, FR3013625, 3013622  
Figure 9 : crystallization & amorphization 
process 
CL6 -2021 -CIRCBIO -01 -04  CONFIDENTIAL  WHITECYCLE  
PART B  13 
Alternative technologies are under development, but not industrial yet in Europe. Chemical depolymerization of PET 
allows to go back to monomers that can be purified and repolymerized to obtain high value PET. Chemical 
depolymerization occurs generally at high temperature resulting in degradation of impurities  or fewer selectivity of 
the catalysts towards PET. Indeed, most chemical processes cannot treat multicomponent or complex feedstocks.  
A more selective process is biological depolymerization using enzymes. Enzymatic depolymerization of PET has 
never been achieved before in satisfying yield and today existing methods are limited to laboratory experiments and 
display low yield (50% with seven 3-day rounds of enzyme addition24). European project P4SB has focused on other 
biological tools for PET degradation, limited at lab scale without communicated efficiency. 
Background: From 2015 to 2017, in the 
framework of the Thanaplast™ project financed by 
Bpifrance, CARBIOS has identified and optimized 
an efficient en zyme able to selectively 
depolymerize 90 % of PET waste in only 10 h at 
moderate temperature (60-75 °C) in water, without 
any organic solvent and at atmospheric pressure 
(TRL5 at the end of the project). Furthermore, the 
enzyme is highly selective for PET (Figure 10) 
and is thus  very tolerant to multimaterial 
feedstocks (no need of drastic sorting for high 
purity of PET in waste, no inhibition by other  
polymers, dyes, or pigments). The enzymatic 
recycling technology developed by CARBIOS 
has been acknowledged as a breakthrough by the scientific community with a publication in the prestigious 
Nature.25  
Scale-up of the enzymatic recycling process has alre ady been performed from laboratory scale (500 mL reactor 
treating batches of 50 g of PET waste - TRL4) to pilot scale (1 m3 reactor treating batches of 100 kg of PET waste - 
TRL6) without any loss of performance. Clear food contact bottles have been produced by L’Oréal, Nestlé Waters, 
PepsiCo and Suntory Beverage & Food Europe from enzymatic r -PET obtained from high PET content colored 
plastic waste26. This result clearly demonstrates the performance of enzymatic recycling to perform circular economy 
without loss of quality. Various high PET content wastes ( coloured and opaque bottles, white textile production 
scraps and post-consumer-coloured clothes) have been treated  at pilot scale. Importantly, the monomers resulting 
from the CARBIOS process coming from colored or opaque plastic waste have, once repolymerized, made it possible 
to obtain high tenacity fibre meeting MICHELIN’s requirement for tyres application.27 
CARBIOS has inaugurated a preindustrial unit (2 t of PET waste treated per week in a 20 m 3 reactor, TRL7) in 
September 2021. After commissioning and first trials, first t of purified TA and purified MEG from high content PET 
waste will be produced by the end of 2022. The p reindustrial unit will be able to treat 100 t / year  of PET starting 
from 2023. Operations of this preindustrial unit will be supported by a European LIFE project from October 2021 to 
December 2024. CARBIOS will thus be able to produce and purify 1-2 t of monomers from high PET content 
waste at the preindustrial unit (TRL7) for this project.  
CARBIOS is planning to begin the building of the first industrial plant of 40 kt in 2023 reaching TRL8 by 2025.  
In parallel of this scale -up, CARBIOS is starting to extend the process to complex waste and in collaboration with 
MICHELIN, has performed first depolymerization trials at lab scale of analytical mixtures of rubber/PET with 70 to 
90% PET content that exhibits correct yield. 
Beyond State-of-the-Art: Leveraging the selectivity of enzymatic depolymerization offers the opportunity to expand 
the eligible range of waste feedstocks for recycling. CARBIOS will validate that a high yield can be achieved with 
the pre-treated complex waste at TRL 4. Then, CARBIOS will optimize the conditions of the whole process for ELT, 
ELH, and complex clothing waste at TRL 6 showing that enzymatic recycling can be  adapted to complex 
feedstocks not recycled today. 
1.2.2.5 Polymerization (PET polycondensation and SSP) & PET filament – spinning twisting and dipping, 
Main issues: During the enzymatic depolymerization of PET, purified terephthalic acid (TA)  and mono ethylene 
glycol (MEG) are generated. However, due to different sources of PET waste, some other chemicals acting as 
impurities can also be present after the purification . While TA and MEG are good for making up a new r -PET 
polymer, other impurity chemicals can have detrimental effect on the polycondensation of r -PET quality. For 
 
24 Kaabel, bioRxiv, 2020, Clean Enzymatic depolymerization of highly crystalline polyethylene terephthalate in moist-solid reaction mixtures 
25 Tournier et al.,Nature volume 580, pages216–219 (2020) An engineered PET depolymerase to break down and recycle plastic bottles 
26 CARBIOS’ press release: 24/06/2021 
27 CARBIOS’ press release: 23/04/2021 
Figure 10 : Enzymatic depolymerization of polymer 
CL6 -2021 -CIRCBIO -01 -04  CONFIDENTIAL  WHITECYCLE  
PART B  14 
example, monofunctional phthalic acids can act as chain terminating agents, resulting in low molecular weight r-PET 
polymers. As such, achieving high intrinsic viscosities (IV) becomes difficult if the number of impurities is high.  
The amount of crystallinity is very important in terms of achieving the  High-Modulus Low-Shrinkage (HMLS) 
property. As such, if the polycondensation does not afford high molecular weight (i.e., high IV values), it is very 
difficult to achieve the desired technical yarn, and further adequate twisted, dipped cord. 
The main issues regarding the PET multifilament spinning are:  
• Spinnability of the r-PET due to the presence of residual impurities or the polymer chains organization  
• Spinning and drawing behaviours of r-PET filaments to reach required specifications for tyre and hose  
• Scaling up to produce PET multifilament yarns in large quantity (700 kg) for end-users' partners.  
• Low amount of r-PET high IV chips which will not be significant enough to feed the preindustrial processes. 
During twisting, and weaving quality problems may arise due to fluffy cord - broken filaments, which in turn reduce 
the mechanical properties of the final tyre -cord and hose -weave fabric During dipping, quality problems such as 
uneven coating of the adhesive layer may occur and cause inefficient adhesion between fibres and rubber compound.  
State-of-the-Art: The different processes involved are well defined and industrialized for over 20 years:  
- the direct polycondensation process has been developed only on ce the purity of the Purified Terephthalic Acid PTA 
reach an acceptable level, and with a specific range of catalysts 
- the solid -state polymerization SSP at temperatures between the glass transition and the onset of melting  to reach 
correct intrinsic viscosity IV (0.6 for garment application, 1 for technical application) 
- the yarn spinning and drawing at high speed 
- the twisting of cord on direct twisting machine 
- weaving, knitting, braiding and consequent dipping or coating for the various application  
The introduction of perturbations in this stream has a significative effect especially on optimized products.  
Fibres can be broadly divided into two segments depending on the PET polymers characteristics and the spinning 
process involved in the production of the yarn:  
• Apparel textile: LOY (Low Oriented Yarn), POY (Partially Oriented Yarn), FOY (Fully Oriented Yarn) or FDY 
(Fully Drawn Yarn) multifilament yarn with mechanical properties until 4 cN/dTex in tenacity, 60% in elongation 
at break, 8 % in shrinkage in general  with molecular weight of 20,000 g/mol, which refers to 0.55 < IV< 0.67 
dL/g 
• Technical textile: HT (High Tenacity), HMLS (High Modulus Low Shrinkage), LS (Low Shrinkage), SLS (Super 
Low Shrinkage) having a minimum of 6,5 cN/dTex in tenacity with high molecular weights (IV>0.95 dL/g).  
The macromolecular chains organization in the polymer filament is a key parameter to reach a HMLS yarn properties. 
The preferably orientation of the polymer chains in the drawing direction during spinning process allows controlling 
the amorphous and crystalline structures (Figure 11) to obtain high tenacity and low shrinkage filaments. 
 
Figure 11: Polymer chains orientation in a spin-drawn filament 
Flakes of PET bottles are first transformed into granulates by compounding process and then processed by melt 
spinning to obtain multifilament yarns or staple fibres. For instance, Indorama Ecorama® fibres are staple fibres 
produced from r -PET Ecorama® res in based on bottle. The IV of these resins are comprised between 0.6 and 0.7 
d/dL and used for textile applications. r -PET industrial yarns are also available. Morssinkhof Sustainable Products 
produces the MOPET -r Yarn 4235T from used bottles and other pos t-consumer and post -industrial packaging for 
hoses application (tenacity = 7 cN/dTex and shrinkage=3%). Until now, no r -PET yarns coming from tyre or 
complex textiles are commercially available for industrial and textile applications.  
PET yarn is turned a round itself to form a twisted cord through different methods such as, ring or direct twisting. 
There is no weaving process in single end cord (SEC) production in demonstration-scale production. In preindustrial 
scale studies twisted yarns are woven together held together with weft fibres. The last step called “dipping” is coating 
cords with a heat curable adhesive layer. The fabric is passed through a pool of water based adhesive formulations 
and then further cured. The main parameters are glue recipe, pro cess conditions (time, temp., tension during glue 
curing) to reach required mechanical and adhesive performance. 
Background: DITF has long experience in novel raw material and catalyst systems, process aids and co-monomers 
especially on polyester on their dedicated facilities (20L) as noticeable through numerous AiF projects 14687, 12428 
and 12318. French Textile Technical Center, IFTH has strong know-how in spinning processes and yarn applications. 

CL6 -2021 -CIRCBIO -01 -04  CONFIDENTIAL  WHITECYCLE  
PART B  15 
For both clothing and technical textile, PET multifilament yarns have already been prototyped by IFTH by the mean 
of a melt spinning semi-industrial line and the use of commercial PET granules with an IV until 1.1 g/dL.  
KORDSA have high knowledge on  esterification and SSP processes  through close contact to  polyester chips 
producers. KORDSA has also long experience in spinning processes of polyester multifilament tyre grade yarns at 
industrial scale and is industrially producing PET dipped cords adapted. Their huge experience on both ring and 
direct twisting on mono-component and hybrid cords and on glue formulations for hard applications will be of interest 
to deal with r -PET yarns (1 out of every 3 -passenger car tyre is reinforced by KORDSA) . Among other activities, 
INDITEX spins garment-grade yarns. MANDALS twist yarn on ring twisters to desired turns per meter and dtex and 
produce circular weaves on circular looms that has been developed, patented, and produced at the site.  
Beyond State-of-the-Art: Novel recipes of polycondensation and SSP  will be developed to eliminate or tolerate 
the putative residual impurities to obtain the r-PET comparable with commercial PET clothing and technical grade. 
The spinnability of the r-PET polymer from complex waste will be studied by the mean of the IFTH semi-industrial 
melt spinning line. The pre-industrial scale studies of the r-PET polymer will be studied by the mean of the KORDSA 
and INDITEX pre-industrial scale line s. Optimization studies will be conducted by KORDSA , INDITEX and 
MANDALS on the bases of varying levels of twisting of r-PET, weaving and dipping processes.  
1.2.2.6 Tyre, hose, and clothing evaluation 
Main issues: Tyre and hose uses are high demanding for HMLS r -PET: new r -PET will require evaluation 
through extreme solicitations. The reinforcement will face complex thermomechanical solicitations during tyre and 
hose manufacturing process and usage (during twisting,  thermal treatment, curing, weaving…). These solicitations 
lead to abrasion and fatigue mechanisms which induce cord damage  that needs to be evaluated in a representative 
environment.  
State of The Art : Impact prediction of cord properties, specifically r -PET on long lasting performance of tyres 
remains a field of research. It has been the subject of numerous publications 282930. However, none of these tests 
correctly predicts tyre damage31 such as fatigue and thermo-mechanical degradations. Scientific research studies both 
in the perimeter of filaments degradations32, and in the perimeter of mesoscopic filament geometry33. r-PET coming 
from bottle recycling find some outputs in textile. Recently, CONTINENTAL announced the usage of recycled PET 
in tyre production3435. This option, integration of r -PET coming from chemical or mechanical recycling ways into 
tyre, is also studied by MICHELIN. However, the main limit of this alternative is the un -accessibility of 
mixed/impure materials (e.g., PET coming from  tyre, hoses, or garments wastes) as they are non -adapted for 
mechanical or chemical recycling. 
Background: The critical point of r -PET is feedstock management and a probable severe competition with the 
packaging sector for raw materials distribution.  More globally, MICHELIN actively researches materials to meet 
100% Sustainable Material Rate by 2050 using Renewable and Recycling technologies. 
MANDALS has been a forerunner in lay -flat hose development in the world for one hundred years. To our 
knowledge, there is no competitors that has plans for developing eco designed hoses. Hoses with r-PET will therefore 
likely be disruptive in this market. 
To evaluate new industrial supplies of PET, MICHELIN requires fabric weaving, dipping, and rubberizing. It usually 
demands minimum 3 t of textile product s per evaluation. Alternative to demonstrate tyre performances with small 
quantities is to use Single End Cord produced by textile industry at laboratory scale and to reconstitute a small surface 
of rubberized fabric processing laboratory drum. Simulation by physical charact erizations and calculations of 
thermomechanical behaviour of textile cords, prediction of tyre industrial scale performances by laboratory properties 
will be complementary elements for industrial performance prevision. 
For MANDALS, current methodology to e valuate new PET yarn requires laboratory tests of some 100 g  of yarns, 
for laboratory and pilot scale tests and then pilot scale production of hoses (some kg of yarn). Finally, full-scale tests 
require some 100 kg of yarns to finished product for small diameter hoses.  
Beyond State-of-the-Art: The demonstration of close loop for so complex product as multicomponent clothing, 
hoses and tyres regarding production and performance will be a breakthrough. Tyre, hose, and clothing eco 
design will be driven by LCA . New methodologies will be required to assess interaction level at each step of PET 
 
28 [Wilson, 1951] Tyre-Cord Compression Fatigue, Wilson M.W, Textile Research Journal 44-47, 1951 
29 [Hearle, 1967] Fatigue in fibres and plastics (a review) Hearle, J.W.S. Journal of Materials Science Volume 2, Issue 5 Pages 474-488, 1967 
30 [Canaveri, 1979] Laboratory Machine to Evaluate the Resistance of Tyre Cords (Textile or Steel), ASTM Special Technical Publication, pp. 110-121 1979 
31 [Le-Clerc, 2006] Mécanismes microstructuraux impliqués dans la fatigue des fibres thermoplastiques Le Clerc C., Ecole Doct. Ecole des Mines de Paris, 
2006 
32 [Bunsell, Le-Clerc 2018] Handbook of Properties of Textile & Technical Fibres, Textile Institute Books, P.595-618, 2018 
33 [Sibellas 2019] Experimental study of the fibre orientations in single and multi-ply continuous filament yarns, Journal of the Textile Institute, September 
2019. 
34 https://www.tyretechnologyinternational.com/news/materials/continental-to-use-recycled-pet-in-tyre-production.html consulted in August 2021 
35 https://www.european-rubber-journal.com/news/conti-upcycle-pet-bottles-tyre-reinforcement-2022 consulted in August 2021. 
CL6 -2021 -CIRCBIO -01 -04  CONFIDENTIAL  WHITECYCLE  
PART B  16 
recycling such as, cleaning, pre -treatment, depolymerization, monomer purification, polycondensation, spinning.  
Tyre, hoses, and garment performances will be demonstrated with moderate r -PET quantity through most 
updated lab-test protocols and low cord consumption. 
1.2.3 Research and innovation activities or projects whose results will feed into the WHITECYCLE project 
The know -how generated in the previous relevant p rojects is presented below  and will be translated into 
WHITECYCLE to generate globally unique and impact-focused foreground.  
EU related 
projects Main objective of the project Main results linked to 
WHITECYCLE project 
BLACKCYCLE 
2020-2023 
H2020 
It aims to create, develop, and optimiz e a full circular value 
chain for the recycling of rubber fraction of ELT to secondary 
raw materials for tyres (r -carbon black, r -plasticizers) with no 
waste of resources in any part of the chain and specific attention 
to the environmental impact (MICHELIN, ESTATO, AXELERA) 
SRMs will be used to manufacture new 
ranges of recycled car and truck tyres. 
MICHELIN will bring knowledge in ELT 
industrial-scale recycling processes and 
in tyre eco-design.  
RESYNTEX 
2015-2019 
H2020 
It aims to develop circular economy for textiles. This project 
made improvements in detection of different mono -component 
materials through hyperspectral technology and on enzymatic 
depolymerization of natural fibre. 
WHITECYCLE will pursue these 
developments for sorting multilayers and 
coated products and for efficient 
depolymerization of PET fibres. 
POLYNSPIRE 
2018-2022 
H2020 
It aims to demonstrate a set of innovative and sustainable 
solutions for efficient plastic recycling, with a focus on PA and 
PU. It addresses 3 innovation pillars which are implemented in 
operational environments reaching TRL 7: chemical, 
mechanical recycling and valorisation (KORDSA) 
Industrial knowledge about the recycling 
of polymers. 
REFIBRE 
2015-2018 
It aims to overcome two  existing barriers limiting ELT fibre 
recycling: (i) absence of economically affordable applications 
for fibre reuse, and (ii) lack of proper treatment technologies for 
recovery of clean fibres. The goal is 100% valorisation of the 
ELT fibre and transformation to useful secondary raw material.  
Specific kn owledge regarding recycling 
processes of ELT fibres to be used as 
secondary raw materials will be brought 
by MICHELIN to the project. However, 
this project leads to downcycling. 
FIBRESORT 
2016-2020 
INTERREG  
Reduction of  the impact of virgin textile materials, a nd the 
development of business models and open markets for the 
growing amounts of recyclable textiles in North -West Europe 
(NWE). It aims to realise the implementation of FIBRESORT 
technology as the new industry st andard to enable high value 
textile-to-textile recycling. 
SIPTEX and  FIBRESORT technologies 
are one of the technologies that could be 
integrated into SYNERGIES mono layer 
sorting plant but is unable to sort 
multilayers. Technology developed by 
IRIS in the project could come in 
complement to this technology 
SIPTEX 
2016-2018 
Swedish program 
SIPTEX is a project that evaluate s automated textile sorting by 
building a pilot. The recognition and sorting equipment are 
based on near-infrared (NIR) technology.  
MERLIN 
2021-2024 
H2020 
It offers innovative solutions for all the processes required to 
increase the quality and rate of recycled plastic materials coming 
from multi-layer packaging waste: (i) sorting (optical sensors, 
AI and robotics), (ii) delamination (depolymerization and 
solvent-based processes), (iii) recycling and (iv) validation 
(developing rigid and flexible packaging solutions). 
Specific knowledge regarding the sorting 
of multi -layer packaging waste 
combining optical sensors, AI and 
robotics and the depolymerization 
through solvent-based techniques. 
DECOAT 
2019-2023 
H2020 
Its goal is to enable circular use of textiles and plastic parts with 
‘coatings’ (performance coatings, paints and adhesion layers). A 
triggerable polymer material system based on smart additives 
and corresponding recycling processes (activating the coating 
formulation) will be developed.  
Specific knowledge regarding 
matrix/coating separation and polymers 
recycling processes 
DEMETO  
2014-2020 
H2020  
DEMETO proposes sustainable industrial application of 
chemical treatment for reuse of PET waste streams  using 
microwave depolymerization. 
The technologies will be compared 
regarding environmental impact and 
robustness  
EERAdata 
2020-2023 
H2020 
Develops and tests a FAIR and open data ecosystem in the low-
carbon energy field, through broad community involvement and 
application in four use cases; implements an open platform for 
Development of a FAIR data 
implementation protocol in 
WHITECYLE 
CL6 -2021 -CIRCBIO -01 -04  CONFIDENTIAL  WHITECYCLE  
PART B  17 
seamless access to energy data. The goal is to facilitate a mental 
shift towards FAIR and open data practices. (HVL) 
THANAPLAST 
2015-2017 
Bpifrance 
Identification and optimization of an efficient enzyme able to 
selectively depolymerize PET. 
TRL5 at the end of the project  has been 
reached. WHITECYCLE will be the next 
step of the THANAPLAST project 
1.2.4 The inter-disciplinary aspect of the project 
WHITECYCLE’s multidisciplinary approach combines en zymatic biotech, various other ecotech and processes, 
materials science, analytical chemistry, digital and AI technologies, risk assessment, business modeling and product 
design, systems thinking, legal and behavioura l studies, as required by the nature of the circularity problems. The 
consortium includes partners with all these backgrounds, many of whom are accustomed to working in 
interdisciplinary teams. Although several of these partners are specialized in their fi elds, two partners, AXELERA 
and DYNERGIE, have a broad general knowledge base of scientific and industrial issues related to ecotech and the 
circular economy. These two partners and WP leaders also have experience in bridging any disciplinary or linguistic 
divides between project partners. In addition, very regular communication between partners will help them to learn 
to speak each others’ “languages”. 
1.2.4.1 Gender dimension 
The consortium has not identified any sex/gender-related issues related to the activities to be carried out, the resulting 
technology and its potential applications. The consortium recognizes the importance of gender equality. The project 
will follow Europ ean regulations/recommendations on the principle of equality between men and women. During 
WHITECYCLE, the consortium will follow the Directive 2002/73/EC on the implementation of equal treatment for 
men and women as guideline, e.g., for access to employment, vocational training, and promotion, working conditions. 
Coincidentally, in fields like manufacturing, recycling, disposal, waste collection, the male presence is relatively 
large, while the presence of females is relatively stron g in design and business management. The consortium is 
conscious of the strategic importance to identify and avoid gender bias in science and solutions. The scientific 
coordinator and the Exploitation Manager will pay special attention to avoid that the designing of methodologies and 
interpretation of data produced during the project could be affected by gender.  
1.2.4.2 Open science and FAIR data management 
FAIR data are a prerequisite for enabling increased transparency along the product life cycle, which is a pl us for 
social acceptance, offering the basis for access to comprehensive information about the entire product supply chain. 
It supports seamless tracking and reporting (even of issues that might only come up later). Implementing a FAIR data 
protocol for all project and use case data from the start allows faster identification of additional exploitation options 
through ensuring machine-actionability (e.g., finding unknown patterns by linking to other business cases, material 
databases, or market data at a large scale). In this way, the range of applicability and transferability of the solutions 
found in the use cases will be enlarged. As of today, the EU is heading the global development of defining and 
operationalizing FAIR data principles for humans and machines alike. Application to industrial use cases is yet in its 
infancy. Very few use cases exist, even fewer reached the level of implementation (i.e., having available coded 
algorithms to handle data exchange in accordance with the FAIR principles, see Sc hwanitz et al. 2021 (under 
review)). WHITECYCLE is an excellent use case for demonstrating the FAIRification cycle because it involves a 
variety of types of data (experimental, qualitative from stakeholder surveys, text documents that handle regulations, 
market data; as well as private/restricted data and open data). As part of the FAIRification process, the proper 
handling of IPR issues is also ensured. For example, all data in the project are assigned with license tags that clarify 
conditions for accesses and open data; the prominence of data is also tracked in the metadata. FAIR principles foster 
seamless interoperability with any other FAIR data sources (so-called FAIR data implementation points), which is a 
prerequisite to enable industry 4.0 technologi es (including automated material discovery, digital reporting & 
compliance) and to realizing the value of data as a business asset.  
Regarding open science, WHITECYCLE offers a prototype for an industrial FAIR data protocol that can be reused, 
replicated, and modified. More specifically, WHITECYCLE, through HVL leadership: 
• Foresees open access to scientific publications under the conditions required by the grant agreement (GA); 
• Manages research data responsibly in line with the FAIR principles as outlined a bove. This includes the 
incorporation of open vocabularies in the linking of data and metadata. Notably, machine -actionability is given 
prominence in the data management plan. Open access to research data is envisaged under the principle ‘as open 
as possible, as closed as necessary’. The conditions required by the GA apply; 
CL6 -2021 -CIRCBIO -01 -04  CONFIDENTIAL  WHITECYCLE  
PART B  18 
• Ensure digital access to all information about the research outputs/tools/instruments needed to validate the 
conclusions of scientific publications or to validate/re -use research data; t he consortium will make use of the 
possibility to publish early results as preprints. Exceptions from this rule are handled in the GA; 
• Confirms that in cases of public emergency, if requested by the granting authority, immediate open access is given 
to all research outputs under open licenses or, if exceptions apply, access under fair and reasonable conditions to 
legal entities that need the research outputs to address the public emergency; 
• Fosters the implementation of open science principles, namely use o f open source software (as far as possible, 
e.g., for the assessments carried out in WP6), open evaluation (through peer -reviewed, open source publications 
and timely presentation of results), open engagement of social actors (through incorporating stakeholder opinions 
in the impacts assessment, WP6); open educational resources (through integrating knowledge from the use cases 
in curricula and course material of academic partners, see above).  
The consortium is experienced in the implementation of FAIR and open data principles and the development of a 
FAIR and open data ecosystem (e.g., EERAdata project).  
2 Impact
2.1 Project’s pathways towards impact  
2.1.1 Increased deployment and market uptake of new 
technological solutions to waste management and 
recycling, and the measurement of recycled content 
Deployment and market uptake require viable costs on one hand 
and buy-in across the value chain on the other hand.  
Viable costs: Since the supply of  recycled PET is limited 
compared to the demand, the price of r -PET from mechanical 
recycling is high  and is completely decorrelated from virgin 
PET. CARBIOS and MICHELIN’s first  projections show that 
the enzymatically r -PET will be less expensive that 
mechanically r-PET and competitive with virgin PET for textile 
applications. Projection on the production cost will vary with 
parameters determined during the WHITECYCLE project (pre-
treatment process, depolymerization yield, purification scheme, 
valorisation of coproducts…). Our strategic positioning comes 
from the ability to treat various currently non-valorised 
complex waste feedstocks and to yield high quality r -PET 
(Figure 12). The price of the resulting r -PET is not expected to 
be a limiting factor for market introduction in the next few years.  
Market uptake across the Value Chain : WHITECYCLE aims to convince at least 12 brand -owners, 3 PET 
manufacturers, and 3 large-scale waste managers to adopt project results by 2030. These are the key deciders in the 
value chain. The strategic importance of brand owners is that they provide the specifications to PET and textile 
manufacturers (e.g., for percentage of recycled PET). Brand -owners whose products use PET cover a vast array of 
sectors including Automotive, Electrical, Electronics and Consumer Goods. 3 brand owners are partners of 
WHITECYCLE: MANDALS, MICHELIN and INDITEX, and CARBIOS created a consortium in 2019 that 
gathers European leaders in packaging namely L’Oréal, Nestlé Waters, Pepsico and Suntory Beverage & Food 
Europe. A major milestone was recently reached with the production by the consortium members of branded bottles 
using CARBIOS r-PET. This step successfully validates the quality of the recycled PET resulting from enzymatic 
recycling (CARBIOS’ press release 24/06/2021). Beverage brand owners have committed to incorporate up to about 
600 kt of food-grade r-PET by 2025 (e.g., Pepsico 25% recycled content by 202336). The next step is to recycle higher 
specification products from more complex waste. CARBIOS is currently negotiating with a consortium of textile 
brand-owners. Even though mandatory textile sorting, and recycling won’t apply until 202537, brand owners in the 
textile industry such as INDITEX, Gap, H&M, Adidas, Nike, Chanel, Hermes, Kering, Carrefour, Galeries 
Lafayette, and La Redoute signed a Fashion Pact and are eager to incorporate recycled content in their products.  
Regarding PET producers, there is one PET manufacturer in the consortium, but it is important that project 
technologies be replicated broadly. Therefore, CARBIOS has already set in motion a pragmatic plan. The SME 
invested and, in September 2021, CARBIOS launched its own industrial demonstration plant to produce r-PET. By 
the end of 2022, the operation of the plant will enable the complete engineering documents for a first process (Process 
 
36 https://www.transparencymarketresearch.com/recycled-pet-market.html  
37 WFD, Article 12b DIRECTIVE (EU) 2018/851 
Figure 12 : WHITECYCLE recycling 
performances versus other comparable solutions 
CL6 -2021 -CIRCBIO -01 -04  CONFIDENTIAL  WHITECYCLE  
PART B  19 
Design Package) to be drawn up for the building and operation of a 30 -50 kt/year capacity reference unit. During 
WHITECYCLE, this demo plant will enable designs for processes for more complex waste to be designed. These  
future industrial-scale units will be operated by PET producers under license agreements with CARBIOS. CARBIOS 
received expressions of interest from 3 industrial-scale PET producers in Europe requesting to host the first planned 
reference unit. The site for the installation of the reference unit will be determined in late 2021 along with the signing 
of a first agreement between CARBIOS and a PET producer. Further discussions with other European PET producers 
for the licensing of the technology will follow. In this way, CARBIOS is committed to enabling the operation of one 
industrial-scale r-PET plant by 2027 and 10 by 2031. 
The quantities of r-PET produced today are too small  (3% of total capacity)  to meet brand-owners’ demand. 
The shortage is expected to  amount to 1.5 Mt by 2025 and 2 Mt by 2030 38. According to WHITECYCLE’s 
exploitation plan, project technologies should produce 2.06 Mt r-PET in 2030, which is well aligned to cover 
this projected shortage. This r-PET can be used for every application, including food packaging and applications 
with stringent mechanical and optical specifications, thus meeting the large market demand expected for r-PET.  
Given the shortage of r -PET, waste managers are another key actor in the value chain. WHITECYCLE partners, 
ESTATO and SYNERGIES are waste management companies with numerous regional, national, and international 
customers and a commitment to circularity. Implementing WHITECYCLE’s new sorting technologies will open new 
markets for them and increase their margins by enabling them to provide higher value materials to new customers 
(80% PET content circular raw material for PET manufacturers thanks to the full combination of AI, aeraulic, tribo-
charging and electrostatic processes). They plan to upscale and broadly implement tyre and clothing separation and 
sorting by 2030. In addition, ALIAPUR is a tyre collection company that is partly owned by MICHELIN and 
committed to the circularity of tyres. CARBIOS in in discussions with major European waste collectors as well as 
European waste collection organisations (Citéo, ReFashion, Texaid, Dutch Circular Textile Valley…) to feed its pre-
industrial unit (100t of PET/year for which a supply contract ha s already been signed) and the future reference unit 
(30-50 kt/year).  IRIS, ESTATO and SYNERGIES will prepare process design kits that enable waste 
management and recycling equipment companies to build and operate optical and electrostatic sorting plants. 
IRIS’s AI based solution to identify PET content in complex waste feedstocks coupled to automated sorting and 
dedicated mechanical preparation steps will for the first time allow waste managers to  select, prepare and enrich to 
at least 80% PET content and has already attracted the interest of SYNERGIES and several other waste management 
companies. This technology will not replace existing jobs, because it will enable first-ever sorting of materials never 
before sorted, manually or otherwise. WHITECYCLE will create an IT decision-support platform for textile  
recycling companies  to help them adopt WHITECYCLE technologies. Other smart waste management solutions 
have already reduced OPEX costs for waste  managers while creating value for strategic decision -making48. Thanks 
to data management from feedstock sorting to monomer re-creation, the r-PET can be certified, and the downstream 
actors (polymer manufacturers, compounders, and end-users…) will be able to prove how much recycle d PET they 
use. This also creates added value that will enable waste management and recycling companies to further invest and 
install new capacity. This will be aligned with EU regulations requiring the use of recycled raw materials , such as 
the binding target that recycled content in PET bottles should reach 25% by 2025 and 30% by 2030 (Art. 6 DIR 
(2019)/904).  
WHITECYCLE’s AI and sorting processes are valuable for every recycling process  (mechanical, chemical, 
enzymatic), because they increase the quality of the feedstock and the yield of any further recycling steps. Moreover, 
the technical solutions elaborated for sorting within the framework of this project will be easily adaptable to the 
treatment of other types of text iles, plastic, and composite  containing wastes. Several WHITECYCLE partners are 
already pushing WHITECYCLE technologies to waste managers, and this project will help de -risk these disruptive 
technologies in the eyes of these companies. IRIS, IPOINT, CARBIOS, AXELERA and MICHELIN will 
continue to engage in targeted techno-push activities to waste managers within and beyond the consortium. 
Europe has a strong and thriving PET manufacturing and processing industry. For example, WHITECYCLE 
partner, KORDSA, is the leading manufacturer of polyester yarn. The major PET manufacturers in Europe are 
SABIC, Indorama, BASF, and Pollisan. These companies have expressed their commitment to producing circular 
PET in their factories and recognize the need to go beyond mecha nical recycling. WHITECYCLE partners are in 
discussions regarding plastic circularity with SABIC and BASF (AXELERA). 
FAIR data will also be used to prepare arguments for market uptake and replication. For example, data could 
be shared with stakeholders to justify process KPIs and show that they are reproducible. 
 
38 HIS Market 2019 
CL6 -2021 -CIRCBIO -01 -04  CONFIDENTIAL  WHITECYCLE  
PART B  20 
The above summary shows the consortium’s commitments to increased deployment and market uptake. Partnerships 
cover the full value chain so that all actors move forward in parallel. Please see also the exploitation plans and 
financial projections in section 2.2.1. 
2.1.2 Increased upcycling and recycling rates for the targeted material streams 
Since 2006, the amount of recycled plastic waste has doubled, and WHITECYCLE aims to continue this progress by 
overcoming today’s main hurdles: the need to make high quality r -plastics from low-value waste streams.39 Today, 
the more complex PET feedstocks targeted in this project are  100% landfilled or  incinerated. Furthermore, for 
textiles, only 0.1-1% is recycled to remake textiles. Enzymatic recycling developed by CARBIOS is the only one to 
date to have upcycled textile waste into clear bottles. WHITECYCLE will show that even the most complex textile 
wastes can be efficiently recycled in a closed loop for new textiles or in added-value bottles.  
A huge improvement over this current situation, the total yield of PET sorting expected at the end of WHITECYCLE 
will be at least 80% for tyres and for PET -containing textiles. In conclusion , through the combination of new 
recognition, sorting and enzymatic depolymerization, the yield on complex feedstock will go from 0 to 80%. 
Our technology developments pave the way for circularity of high-quality PET; the quality of the sorting (mechanical 
and enzymatic) will give access to full high-quality recycling of 20 Mt fully deployed at global scale by 2050. 
Within 4 years after the project (2030), WHITECYCLE is expected to enable the circular recycling of a total 
of 2.06 Mt of PET: 1.85 Mt of PET multicomponent textiles, plus 200 kt of PET from tyres, plus 10 kt of hosing. 
The calculation is based on a middle ramp-up with the following assumptions: 
• Assuming today’s production volumes and that all r-PET produced is used as raw materials for circular production 
in the same applications meeting the same standards. 
• Textile fibres waste represent about 7  % by weight of ELT or 320 kt/y per year of dirty fibres in Europe with a 
potential volume of 680 kt/y if all available ELT are shredded  
• 50 % by mass of ELT dirty fibres is polymer of which 75% is PET: it represents 120 kt/y of PET with a potential 
of 250 kt/y 
• 25% by mass of ELH content is PET 
• Due to new applications of secondary raw material, 100 % of collected tyres in Europe will be granulated.  
• 11.6 Mt of projected waste clothing in Europe in 2030, with 50 % of PET and 40 % of this feedstock is composed 
of multicomponent textile clothing with significant PET content (40-95 %), which yields 2.3 Mt/y of extractable 
PET thanks to the WHITECYCLE project  
• Assuming 80% efficiency in the full collection, sorting and recycling process. 
The mandatory common EU targets are listed below. By 2030, Europe will require double the current PET 
reprocessing capacity to process the tonnage of PET expected to be collected if these EU targets are met40 e.g., around 
2 Mt of additional r-PET. WHITECYCLE will enable these targets to be met. 
- > 55% of municipal waste must be recycled by 2025; 60% by 2030 and 65% by 2035. 
- beverage bottle collection should reach 77% by 2025 and 90% by 2029 (Art. 9 DIR (2019)/904)  
- > 50% recycling of all plastic packaging by 2025, and > 55% by 2030.  
- < 10% of municipal waste can be deposited in a landfill by 2035. 
- a separate collection of textile waste will be compulsory in Europe by 2025 with no incineration or landfilling.  
- recycled content in PET bottles should reach 25% by 2025 and 30% by 2030 (Art. 6 DIR (2019)/904) 
2.1.3 Increased resource efficiency along and across valu e chains, causing a measurable reduction in GHG 
emissions 
The 2.06 Mt/y by 2030 of r-PET targeted described above will replace both PET incineration and primary production 
from fossil fuels, thereby increasing resource efficiency  and dramatically reducing GHG emissions . On one hand, 
regarding the end of life, by  preventing incineration of end -of-life PET, the project is expected to reduce GHG 
emissions by 2.78 Mt CO2eq per year by 2030.  This first basic calculation on the perimete r of incineration step 
relies on the following assumptions: about 50% of complex PET-containing waste is currently incinerated in the EU40 
(the rest being landfilled), and 2.7 t of CO2 are released for every ton of incinerated plastic on average41.  
On the other hand, based on life cycle assessment methodology, climate impacts are directly linked to the production 
of PET. On average today, 4.6 kgCO2eq is emitted per kg PET produced 43. LCA studies exist on classical 
mechanical, chemical recycling of PET vs bio based or virgin PET production 42. A first LCA study for enzymatic 
 
39 https://www.plasticseurope.org/application/files/1115/7236/4388/FINAL_web_version_Plastics_the_facts2019_14102019.pdf  
40 Plastics Recyclers Europe, 2020 
41 Industrial transformation 2050 — Pathways to net-zero emissions from EU heavy industry, Material Economics, Stockholm 
(https://materialeconomics.com/publications/industrial-transformation-2050). 
42 ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng. 2018, 6, 8, 9725–9733, Journal of Polymers and the Environment volume 27, pages533–548(2019), Journal of Environmental 
Management, Volume 260, 15 April 2020, 110062 
CL6 -2021 -CIRCBIO -01 -04  CONFIDENTIAL  WHITECYCLE  
PART B  21 
recycling was proposed by Singh et al.43 including the full recycling loop of clear and colored bottles, amorphization, 
enzymatic depolymerization and purification. It emphasizes that enzymatic recycling reduces the total supply chain 
energy used by 69 to 83  % to produce terephthalic acid (PET monomer pr ecursor) and by 35 to 42  % to 
produce PET. This results in GHG emissions reductions between 8 to 21% to produce PET (0.5kg to 1kgCO2eq 
per kg PET produced) compared with the fossil-derived PET production baseline. Independently, preliminary 
LCA studies using “Product Environmental Footprint” ( PEF) methodology, conducted at M ICHELIN with 
CARBIOS data (functional unit: To provide 1kg of bottle grade PET granulate at the production plant gate & to 
manage the corresponding kg of PET waste at end of l ife used)  reproduce this order of magnitude. In the 
WHITECYCLE proposal and with conservative assumptions we estimate that a total of 2.06 MtCO2eq will be saved 
per year in 2030 (1 MtCO2eq saved per Mt PET produced x 2.06 Mt r-PET produced). 
2.1.4 A significantly higher level of involvement of all actors (manufacturers, retailers, consumers, CSOs, public 
administration etc.) in circular practices 
A circular economy will require commitment and organization by  public authorities, manufacturers, citizens, and 
consumers. For them to accept the extra responsibility and burden, WHITECYCLE will consider how the direct 
benefits of the circular economy can be shared with them, and these benefits must be clear, transparent, and attractive 
for them to adopt. For example, AXELERA will forge a link with EU training programmes  (WP6), so that 
WHITECYCLE partners join trainers and students in preparing the work force for the new jobs the circular economy 
will create. This will enable European students to get interestin g and high-impact jobs. HVL will explore how the 
project can create value for citizens, consumers, companies, and public authorities and then prepare convincing 
communications to be transmitted broadly by consortium partners and the networks in which they are present. 
Partners’ policy divisions will inform policymakers to ensure that policy requirements are more ambitious, given the 
new technical possibilities enabled by WHITECYCLE.  FAIR data can provide an objective basis for policy - and 
decision-making by stakeholders. ERASME will study and outline synergies between partners and companies, 
local symbiosis exploitation and improvement in circular economy scheme and value chains to deliver indicators 
and roadmaps for the partners and industrial companies of the sector to improve replicability of the best practices. 
2.1.5 Strengthened competitiveness and job retention and creation potential of circular value chains under different 
economic and social conditions 
The 9 companies in the WHITECYCLE consortium will bring  the technologies to the market and have prepared 
financial and job projections (see sec. 2.2.2) . In summary, these 9 companies plan to create 130 direct jobs in 
Europe and 35 direct jobs in Turkey by 2030 linked to the first stages of exploitation of WHITECYCLE results. 
Recycling creates an average of ten times more jobs than trash.  Many more waste management jobs and companies 
are needed in Europe to meet the challenges of a circular economy. In nature, almost 20% of the species are dedicated 
to the degradation of “waste” (end-of-life) biomass44. Between 2012 and 2018 , the number of jobs linked to the 
circular economy in the EU grew by 5 % to reach around 4 million. The circular economy has the potential to create 
more than 700 000 new  jobs in Europe by 203045, while improving the quality of jobs.  Therefore, further indirect 
jobs will be created in the below -described large and growing markets  and through the replication of the project 
concept in other contexts. 
 
A net exporter (trade balance of 15 billion euros in 2018), the European plastics industry directly employs more 
than 1.6 million people in Europe with 60,000 companies and turnover of €360b n39 for plastic manufacturing 
and processing. The PET market has an annual growth over 4% with European consumption of 15.9 Mt/year  
(5.8 Mt plastics and 10.1 Mt fibers)  with similar amounts of PET becoming waste each year (70 Mt annual global 
production). The r-PET market is forecast to double by 202 9, reaching $4.7 bn46, notably due to European 
regulations that impose an increased content of recycled PET in packaging bottles. 
In Europe, the textile industry employs  nearly 6% of manufacturing workers47. A Combined Annual Growth 
Rate (CAGR) of 5% is expected through 2025. Europe is home to hundreds of leading textile retailers and brands, 
internationally acclaimed designers, thousands of talented emerging designers, and forward -thinking entrepreneurs, 
researchers, and educators. European high-quality textiles are in growing demand across the world.  
 
 
43 Singh et al., Techno-economic, life-cycle, & socioeconomic impact analysis of enzymatic recycling of PET, Joule (2021), 
doi.org/10.1016/j.joule.2021.06.015 
44 https://www.seuil.com/ouvrage/homo-detritus-baptiste-monsaingeon/9782021352603  
45 https://www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/assets/downloads/publications/EllenMacArthurFoundation_Growth-Within_July15.pdf   
46 https://www.environmentalleader.com/2020/03/recycled-pet-market-2029/  
47 https://www.mordorintelligence.com/industry-reports/europe-textile-industry  
CL6 -2021 -CIRCBIO -01 -04  CONFIDENTIAL  WHITECYCLE  
PART B  22 
The smart waste management market was valued at USD 1.77 billion in 2020 and is expected to reach USD 6.52 
billion by 2026, registering a CAGR over 25%, from 2021 48. 3 of the 5 major worldwide players are European 
companies with hubs in France and Germany (Suez, Veolia, Pepperl+Fuchs).  
In conclusion, WHITECYCLE’s circular solutions will create local jobs for a fair and inclusive Europe.  
2.1.6 Other expected outcomes addressed by the WHITECYCLE project 
Up to 80  % of the environmental impacts of products are determined during the design phase. Using recycled 
products reduces energy, water, and virgin resource consumption over its lifecycle of transportation, production, 
consumption, and disposal. Let’s consider water impacts. 79 billion m3 of water was used by the global textile 
industry in 2015, using plastic waste instead to make clothing greatly reduces water use. Wate r scarcity is an 
increasingly frequent phenomenon affecting at least 11% of the EU population and 17% of its territory.  
Regarding landfilling, about 50% of complex PET-containing waste is landfilled in the EU (the rest being incinerated) 
so WHITECYCLE will prevent landfilling of about 1.03  Mt of PET per year by 2030  (50% x 2.06Mt r -PET 
produced in a circular loop rather than in the traditional way). 
Regarding pollution, PET single-use beverage bottles are among the most common marine litter items found on most 
beaches in the EU (DIR(2019)904). PET degrades very slowly in water and contributes to growing plastic continents 
in oceans, dispersion of microplastics in soil and water, with harmful effects on biodiversity. More than 700 species 
of marine animals have been found with traces of plastics in their digestive tracts. 
Moreover, the digitalization of the recognition prototype will enable the collection of data relating to the chemical 
compositions of textile waste, which is still very unknown to t his day. The data will be shared through the FAIR 
implementation protocol to different shareholders in the perspective to enhance the creation of similar projects, to 
address the issue of recycling other textile components than PET (e.g., nylon, cotton etc.). This will ultimately 
facilitate circular economy. The development of digital solutions will allow to draw software modeling practices to 
help implement a model for data management of the monitoring system which could be easily deployed for other 
value chains containing textile PET materials as packaging or construction.  
During the COVID-19 crisis, an increased volume of personal protection equipment PPE with single use or short use 
generated a huge complex waste feedstock 49. Among these products, compl ex waste streams of multicomponent 
materials that can be found in masks have to be collected, separated, treated. WHITECYCLE technology will be able 
to help and improved these complex waste management issues. 
In addition, our project will contribute to a greener industrial Europe as recommended in European Green Deal, 
Industrial Strategy for Europe COM(2020)102). The Green Deal also aims at helping companies become world 
leaders in clean products and technologies. The 9 companies developing technologies respect the principles of green 
processes at high yields in mild conditions, without organic solvents, and with valorisation of co-products. 
2.1.7 Barriers 
The question of when wastes become raw materials: When a waste becomes a raw material, this can create more 
value for the next steps of the value chain. MICHELIN and other project partners are involved in working groups to 
solve this problem of inequity of value creation, which slows the activation of the  part of the value chain that deals 
with low-value or negative value “waste”. 
Regulations: Through its Standards & Regulations department s, partners will determine the status of materials, 
whether they are considered as waste or secondary raw materials in respect of different regulations to enable their 
transport, which is limited for “waste” by regulations , including the Waste Framework Directive (WFD), directive 
2008/98/EC. The constraints of the REACH regulation (regulation N°1907/2006) will be carefully respected. 
Economic competitiveness: The overall cost of r-PET will depend on fluctuating PET waste price and on the process 
itself. Emerging regulations, listed above, will help ensure competitiveness . Also, the low cost of poorly recycled, 
complex waste and the low-energy use and cost of the processes will help ensure economic viability. 
Reliable feedstock sourcing:  A sufficient supply of waste is needed to feed the recycling units. This is  highly 
mitigated by process applicability to quite diverse, impure, low-value waste streams as opposed to the other recycling 
solutions. Strong and mutually beneficial relationships will be built with several waste management companies, two 
of which are consortium partners.
2.2 Measures to maximise impact – Dissemination, exploitation, and communication 
Protection, exploitation, and dissemination activities will be managed by appointed managers (IPR manager; 
Exploitation and innovation manager; Communication and Dissemination manager) with clearly defined roles within 
 
48 https://www.mordorintelligence.com/industry-reports/smart-waste-management-market  
49 Face masks and the environment: Preventing the next plastic problem, 03/2021 (Face masks and the environment: Preventing the next plastic problem -- 
ScienceDaily) 
CL6 -2021 -CIRCBIO -01 -04  CONFIDENTIAL  WHITECYCLE  
PART B  23 
the WP7 “Dissemination Communication,  Strategic Intelligence, Outreach and Replication”. The leader of 
dissemination and outreach  will be AXELERA, a public -private network of 370 members with partners across 
Europe and the world. This network will serve as a solid basis for reaching relevant stakeholders including key 
partnerships to link innovation projects to early adopter companies.  
• The first key partnership is with its 240 member companies of which 120 are small and 100 of which are large 
multi-national companies located across Europe and /or the world (waste management companies, materials 
manufacturers, eco-technology manufacturers, engineering firms, etc.).  
• Secondly, AXELERA has close partnerships with 15 European clusters, public-private partnerships, and industry 
groupings in the fiel d of WHITECYCLE who facilitate connections with their member companies (PETCore, 
P4Planet, EIT Raw Materials, SUSCHEM, CO2Value Europe, FundingBox, Eyde Cluster (NO), Brightlands 
(NL), Clean (DK), Greenwin [BE], Chemie Cluster Bayern [DE], CleanTech Alpes [CH], Environment Park [IT], 
IAR [FR], Association Chimie du Végétal [FR]).  
• Thirdly, AXELERA maintains strong relationships with 9 large research organizations beyond the 
WHITECYCLE consortium that collaborate with innovative companies in the field of WHI TECYCLE 
(AIMPLAS, BGR, CEA, Fraunhofer, ICAMCYL, IFPEN, SINTEF, Tecnalia and VTT).  
• Fourthly, local development agencies and chambers of commerce across Europe and the world (notably in China 
and Canada) are key partners on the international scene. AXELERA  has a flexible and “smart” contact database 
platform based on EUDONET software that facilitates communication and collaboration with this large network 
in line with the General Data Protection Regulation. 
Partners will push info via the WHITECYCLE website, social media, newsletters, B2B meetings, workshops, trade 
fairs, process design kits, scientific publications, FAIR data, video, press releases, leaflets, etc. (WP7). 
2.2.1 Dissemination activities 
Objectives per 
stakeholder Dissemination activities / channels 
To convince at 
least 12 brand -
owners, 3 PET 
manufacturers, 
and 3 large -
scale wastes to 
be early 
adopters of 
project results  
Key data will be provided via exploitable metrics to technology scouts from relevant industries so that 
WHITECYCLE circular recycling processes can be rapidly transferred to at least 18 companies by the 
end of the project for upscaling and industrial imple mentation across Europe. Notably, CARBIOS will 
prepare a process design kit for enzymatic recycling and will transfer it to at least one major PET 
manufacturer (by 2026) who agrees to produce r -PET at an industrial scale using project technologies. 
Similarly, IRIS, ESTATO and SYNERGIES will prepare process design kits that enable companies to 
build and operate optical and electrostatic sorting plants. ESTATO and SYNERGIES aim to build and 
operate such sorting lines. IRIS plans to exploit the recognition sys tem developed considering 
SYNERGIES as a preferential customer, before widening the scope to other potential waste managers. 
The 3 brand-owners in the consortium will convey to their PET suppliers that they would like to purchase 
large volumes of r -PET produced via WHITECYCLE enzymatic recycling. The consortium will also 
reach out to additional  brand-owners (see sec 2.1), to waste managers and to PET producers to provide 
additional sales arguments, since brand owners provide the specifications for PET. In addition to already 
targeted prospects, a dditional end-user companies will be identified by all partners and by AXELERA 
during strategic intelligence work. MICHELIN will openly disseminate its knowledge gained on tyre eco-
design. 
WHITECYCLE will create an IT platform enabling the automatic assessment of a waste feedstock’s 
environmental impact and its compatibility with WHITECYCLE’s recycling solutions. This tool will be 
disseminated to recycling companies, especially for textile recycling, to help them to plan their transition 
to WHITECYCLE technologies. 
The consortium will organise 2 workshops in conjunction with international events attracting large 
numbers of potential end-users to spread awareness of the main results of WHITECYCLE. The workshops 
will in clude 40 to 60 direct participants, with a focus on  presenting the results of demonstrations to  
potential early adopters of project technologies. The workshops will serve to obtain companies’ needs and 
feedback and to strengthen relationships. Workshop may  include virtual or real site visits.  In addition, 
B2B meetings will be a core part of WHITECYCLE dissemination and will involve all partners 
developing technologies plus AXELERA.  
The Advisory Board will be composed of ALIAPUR, WESTERN SYDNEY UNIVERSITY, 
UNIVERSIDAD DE LEON and REFASHION. They will play an important role in the adoption of the 
project results by external stakeholders. 
Companies will reach out to s pecialist and industrial websites  and publications  such as PETCore. 
Outreach to  clusters will be ensured by AXELERA, as these clusters facilitate access to many early 
adopters. 
To disseminate 
the project idea, 
approach, and 
Target audiences will include researchers in universities and RTOs in the fields of enzymology, biotech, 
green chemistry, smart waste sorting, AI, textiles, polymer recycling, LCA and the circular economy from 
CL6 -2021 -CIRCBIO -01 -04  CONFIDENTIAL  WHITECYCLE  
PART B  24 
results to the 
public research  
and training  
communities 
different perspectives including materials, en gineering, digital, SSH, environmental, toxicology and 
business research. 
To disseminate the results of the projects, WHITECYCLE partners plan to submit 10 major scientific 
publications to peer-reviewed journals and to present results at conferences. AXELERA will prepare easy-
to-understand summaries of 3 of the major publications to emphasize its key messages and to increase the 
impacts for the targeted stakeholders. 
Partners will present and network at appropriate meetings, such as the Suschem annual meeti ng, the 
PETCore Annual Conference, IEEE Industry Applications Society Annual Meeting,  European Tyre 
Recycling Conference, etc. 
AXELERA will strengthen links between the consortium and EU training networks in the Circular 
Economy, such as C -PLANET and CAPTU RE, whose training schedules coincide well with 
WHITECYCLE’s. WHITECYCLE will provide case studies and data so that these training networks can 
provide relevant training content to their students, as well as partners’  needs concerning technicians, 
engineers, and scientists. This outreach is expected to lead to internships and/or hires at partner companies. 
Two biographies of “heroic” people in the consortium making great progress toward the circular economy 
will be shared, and one of these biographies will cover a woman, such as Frédérique Guillamot, Innovation 
Manager at CARBIOS, to encourage young women to pur sue careers in science and industry, especially 
in the circular economy. 
To 
communicate 
clearly with the 
general public 
Via the public website, social media, newsletters, press releases, video, and summaries of publications.  
Dissemination to the International Network on Public Communication of Science and Technology 
Partners will participate in broadly disseminated interviews in popular science blogs, online channels, 
magazines, newspapers, radio, or television. The SSH partners ERASME will host webinars, workshops, 
and debates for the general public on circular economy topics.  
All dissemination and communication will be written in a gender -sensitive way, including submissions designed to 
encourage women in engineering and scientific careers. 
2.2.2 WHITECYCLE exploitation plan 
2.2.2.1 Key exploitable results and ownership 
An exploitation plan is found below followed by individual exploitation plans as well as financial and job projections. 
Key Exploitable Results Target Exploitation 
Route  
Exploiting 
Partner 
IP protection / 
dissemination Target Users/Clients 
Knowledge and new processes 
related to sorting and separation 
systems for composites and multi-
material textiles 
Create the first polyvalent 
automated sorting plant in 
France at 20 kt scale.  Sales 
of sorted textiles as 
secondary raw material 
Licensing of processes to 
companies. Possible 
creation of JV or spin-off.  
IRIS, 
SYNERGIES 
PPRIME 
MICHELIN 
Patents + Process 
Design Kit. F urther 
R&D to reach other 
sectors and improve 
KPIs 
  
Waste managers & 
recycling equipment 
manufacturers. 
Companies that need to 
improve composite 
sorting. Companies in 
PET recycling and 
production. Companies 
focusing on automatizing 
new processes. 
   
Optimized optical system for the 
chemical identification of PET and 
other elements in textile-based 
products 
Licensing of processes to 
companies. Possible 
creation of joint-venture or 
spin-off company. 
IRIS 
New processes for PET 
amorphization  
Licensing of processes 
to companies 
IFTH 
MICHELIN 
Optimized process for enzymatic 
PET depolymerisation from complex 
composite and multi-material waste 
including monomer purification 
Licensing of processes 
to companies  
One operational plant by 
2026 & 10 by 2031 
CARBIOS 
Patents + Process 
Design Kit. F urther 
R&D to reach other 
sectors and improve 
KPIs 
Companies in PET 
recycling and production 
+ Brand owners for PET -
containing products + 
companies in PTA 
production 
Enzyme adapted to complex 
composite and multi-material textiles 
Selling enzymes to 
licensee (3 PET 
producers) 
CARBIOS 
Patents and possibility 
to extend to other 
application sectors 
Companies in PET 
recycling and production 
or companies in PTA 
production 
Knowledge and optimized process 
related to the polymerization of 
technical grade r-PET 
Production of r -PET, 
licensing to other 
companies  
DITF / 
KORDSA Patent 
Companies specialized in 
technical PET 
polycondensation 
Knowledge related to the 
manufacturing of r-PET-based hoses 
Production and sales of 
r-PET containing hoses MANDALS Patent Hosing market actors 
Knowledge related to the 
manufacturing of r-PET-based 
clothing 
Production and sales of 
r-PET containing 
garments 
INDITEX Patent Clothing market actors 
CL6 -2021 -CIRCBIO -01 -04  CONFIDENTIAL  WHITECYCLE  
PART B  25 
Knowledge related to the 
manufacturing of r-PET yarns and 
cords 
Production and sales of 
r-PET yarns & cords for 
tyres, hoses and building  
KORDSA Patent Tyre, hose and building 
material manufacturers 
Knowledge regarding the eco-impacts 
of tyre components on the circular 
value chain 
Production and sales of 
eco-designed, r -PET 
containing tyres 
MICHELIN 
Open dissemination of 
eco-design best 
practices  
Plastic & composite 
industries, SMEs, Public 
and private organizations 
Knowledge related to the 
manufacturing of r-PET-based tyres 
Production and sales of 
eco-designed, r -PET 
containing tyres 
MICHELIN Patent Tyre market actors 
IT platform enabling an automatic 
calculation of a feedstock’s 
environmental impact assessment and 
its compatibility with 
WHITECYCLE’s recycling process 
Access fee to platform 
MICHELIN 
SYNERGIES 
IRIS 
Patent Recyclers, textile sector 
2.2.2.2 Preliminary High-Level Exploitation plan 
Overall exploitation framework. The exploitation of project results will remain open to partners who contributed 
to each result. This will be ensured by the Grant Agreement and Consortium Agreement. Partners will negotiate the 
terms of their future relationships as partners, suppliers, customers, advisors, prescribers, etc. The exploiting 
partner(s) will select all deliverables and outcomes that (i) can be  transformed into exploitable results, (ii) confer a 
competitive edge to the exploitable result, (iii) are in accordance with the Intellectual Property policy.  
Key Areas of Application. The disruptive eco-KPIs of WHITECYCLE products and process increases their value 
versus competitors. Currently, the prices of r-PET are not competitive with virgin PET (v-PET), but the situation is 
expected to evolve with WHITECYCLE. Its novel technologies will make r -PET relevant for higher added value 
composite and multilayer end-product markets, notably in Europe, North America, Japan, and China. 
Competitive Advantages.  WHITECYCLE will give value to the complex PET fraction abundant in waste 
feedstocks. The expected price of r-PET is competitive with v-PET.  
Market. The PET market size was valued at USD 27 billion in 2020 and is projected to reach USD 40 billion by 
2028, growing at a CAGR of 3.69% from 2021 to 202850. 
Sales and Marketing Strategy.  Hoses, tyres, and clothing will be distributed through direct sales. Products will 
have high added value and competitive price. A digital marketing approach will be used to develop communication, 
sales support tools, and expertise sharing. The key industrial brand-owners, MICHELIN, MANDALS and INDITEX 
have a very good market position and sales force. As for the process technologies, these will be licensed or jointly 
exploited through the creation of joint ventures. See also financial project tables below. 
advantage. WHITECYCLE therefore, has a great economical potential as this is not the only output of the project. 
2.2.2.3 Individual exploitation plans 
MICHELIN: Industrial/commercialization strategies: MICHELIN will (i) develop new process solutions & 
design rules to sort, pre-treat and integrate the wasted PET from composites into valuable materials  that is a 
“ready to be enzymatically depolymerized PET”: these materials and associated process and rules will be deployed 
in different industries involved in recycling of composites (target 500 kt/y). First perimeter of application will be the 
tyre recycling industry. (ii) Design and produce new tyre ranges including these sustainable materials  derived 
from the project, such as recovered PET: these tyres will equip a wide variety of vehicles especially personal cars. 
MICHELIN will enhance the reuse of ELT and increase the content of r-PET in its tyre lines: 70 kt of PET per year 
will move from a fossil source to a recycled source for direct internal use.  The strategy is to upscale and massively 
deploy the pre-industrial processes by 2030 both in new commercial product launches and in existing products.  
Main clients: Automotive OEMs, car drivers, agricultural tractor OEMs, and associated aftermarket. 
Delivery channels: Tyre dealers. 
 
MANDALS: Industrial/commercialization strategies: Hoses with r -PET will be  sold to already existing markets 
worldwide, such as water  transport, firefighting, dewatering, pipe rehabilitation, hydraulic fracturing, compressed 
air, agriculture, construction, and raisers in wells. The r-PET hoses will be integrated in commercial launches of 
premium hoses. MANDALS will also develop a service that will recover end-of-life products.  
Main clients: construction companies, firefighter authorities, general public, farms, industrial companies, etc. 
Delivery channels: Direct sales 
 
 
50 Global Polyethylene Terephthalate Market Size By Application (Food & Beverages, Sheets & Films, Consumer Goods), By End Use Industry (Packaging, 
Electrical & Electronics, Automotive, Construction), By Geographic Scope And Forecast 
Report ID: 41941 | Published Date: Jul 2021 | No. of Pages: 202 | Base Year for Estimate: 2020 
CL6 -2021 -CIRCBIO -01 -04  CONFIDENTIAL  WHITECYCLE  
PART B  26 
CARBIOS: Industrial/commercialization strategies: Broad replication will occur via licensing CARBIOS’s 
technology to PET producers who will build and operate industrial plants. CARBIOS has built an  operational 
demonstration plant. CARBIOS will use this demonstrator platform during and after WHITECYCLE to facilitate the 
replication of its process for a large variety of sectors and companies . CARBIOS will gather data from the process 
to prepare a Process Design Package that is a blueprint and guide enabling one to build r-PET production lines based 
on enzymatic recycling. It will allow precise determination of quality and price levels of the recycled monomers as 
well as environmental impact. CARBIOS will “sell” this blueprint to PET producers with the following exploitation 
roadmap: (a) CARBIOS licences the te chnology by 2026 to 3 major PET producers, who will build (b) one 
operational plant by 2026 and (c) 10 by 2031 . Licensing will be done with the support of Technip, a large 
engineering project management company who will bring its expertise in licensing contracts and its network of PET 
producers while CARBIOS will bring IP and know-how on the technology. CARBIOS will receive fees for assistance 
and technical support. CARBIOS’ proprietary enzyme will be produced by Novozymes, the global enzyme producer 
in Denmark. CARBIOS will directly sell the enzymes required for depolymerization to PET producers.  
Main clients: Chemical companies, PET manufacturers, PET recyclers. 
Delivery channels: Direct delivery of Process Design Package, consulting services and enzymes 
 
KORDSA: Industrial/commercial strategy: KORDSA is aiming at being able to produce industrial grade yarns 
from recycled feedstocks. Commercialization of recycled PET fibres for demanding applications are not mature yet. 
As soon as the recycled PET fibres are produced, mainstream products with r-PET will be manufactured. 
PET flakes are widely available in the industry mainly supplied from China. Any establishment of an EU-based cost 
competitive PET flake supply will increase competitiveness. Therefor e, commercial strategy to be evolved on 
enrichment of KORDSA product portfolio that will serve both environment and business sustainability. 
Main clients: Textile industry, tyre industry, hose industry – more largely any industries that use PET-based yarns. 
Delivery channels: Direct sales of r-PET yarns. 
 
ESTATO: Industrial/commercial strategy: The new sorting machine will be upscaled and installed to improve 
the existing material flow and quality and separate the PET fibre fraction from rubb er. Rubber and PET 
fractions will be marketed separately. 
Main clients: Chemical companies, PET manufacturers and plastic recyclers. 
Delivery channels: Direct sales 
 
IPOINT: Industrial/commercial strategy: After completion of the project, IPOINT plans to integrate the results 
into its own software products for LCA , which will be customized through existing channels and customer 
relationships. In addition, IPOINT expects to develop completely new target group s and, in the medium term (2 -5 
years after the end of the project), to achieve significant additional annual growth in turnover and staff  thanks to 
additional revenue opportunities in sustainability consulting and in license sales of the Umberto software.  
Main clients: Companies and consortia that need to carry out extensive LCA analyses. 
Delivery channels: Licenses are primarily offered as rental licenses or software-as-a-service 
 
SYNERGIES: Industrial/commercial strategy:  SYNERGIES aims to implement the multilayer sorting 
technologies developed by IRIS its future industrial plant. This will allow SYNERGIES to sort complex clothing 
feedstocks that are not recycled now  in time to meet stricter regulations . SYNERGIES will then sell t hese sorted 
materials to the textile, tyre, plastics, building, and automotive industries. SYNERGIES business model is to sell 
treatment of end-of-life clothing, professional and industrial textiles and to secondary raw material preparation. 
Main clients: Sales of waste management services to textile industries and brand-owners; sales of sorted textile waste 
to be compliant with recyclers’ specifications/requirements. 
Delivery channels: Direct sales of services and sorted/treated textiles to textile industries and brand-owners. 
 
IRIS: Industrial/commercial strategy: IRIS aims to license its optical-based technologies for in-line textile waste 
characterization, detection, and sorting to waste managers and textile companies. JV will be considered. 
Main clients: Recyclers, waste managers, textile companies.  
Delivery channels: Direct licensing, joint venture. 
 
 
INDITEX: Industrial/commercial strategy: INDITEX manages very large amounts of textile waste every year that  
are, for the most part , not recycled.  INDITEX aims to implement technologies at industrial scale that could turn 
textiles into a fully circular product. INDITEX is contemplating investment in technological components that are 
being developed through WHITECYCLE to retrieve PET contained in the INDITEX clothing waste. INDITEX will 
be selling new lines of garments that contain r-PET. 
Main clients: General public, companies. 
Delivery channels: Direct sale of clothing containing recycled PET 
CL6 -2021 -CIRCBIO -01 -04  CONFIDENTIAL  WHITECYCLE  
PART B  27 
The revenues from exploitation phase for the exploitation partners are presented in Figure 13. 
 
Figure 13 : Total expected revenues from the exploitation partners 
The total revenues of the 9 exploitation partners of WHITECYCLE will reach 500 M€ by 2031. 
2.2.3 Intellectual property rights 
Intellectual Property Rights protection activities are managed under WP 0. The overall IPR strategy of the project is 
to ensure that partners can fully exploit their market position, involving patent protection. The partners will sign a 
Consortium Agreement (CA) prior to the signature of the Grant Agreement (GA) with the EC in which all the rules 
for ensuring confidentiality (procedure for granting publication of the results), ownership regime and IPR protection 
(background included and excluded, ownership, general licensing terms, etc.) are detailed. The CA will be based on 
the IP background and foreground  provided below and on the EC portal , which will be the starting point for IPR 
Protection and Exploitation Plans. 
 Background IP brought to the project 
MICHELIN 
Patents relating to (i) plasma-treatment of PET reinforcement to amorphize (EP2855133 A1, EP3074199 B1), 
(ii) hybrid textile cords made of aramid and PET or hybrid cords usable for mono carcass ply of passenger car 
tyre (WO2020/058632), (iii) carcass PET-based ply of car tyre suitable for run flat use (EP3010731 B1). 
CARBIOS 
Expertise, and patents on PET recycling technology adapted to bottle feedstocks and pure PET textile. 
• PET pretreatment (WO 2017/198786),  
• PET enzymatic depolymerization (WO 2014/079844, WO 2020/094661, WO 2020/094646),  
• Efficient PET depolymerase (WO 2018/0112 84, WO 2018/011281, WO 2020/021116, WO 
2020/021117, WO 2020/021118)  
• Monomers purification process 
KORDSA Knowledge on key process parameters related to the twisting, weaving dipping processes of v-PET based yarns 
MANDALS Work on PET plasma-treatment to chemically activate yarn - enhance bonding btw weave and hose cover layer 
PPRIME Two patents related to the electrostatic separation of granular materials  
IRIS 
Knowledge on in-line monitoring systems based on photonic technologies (e.g., NIR, HSI, LIBs…) improved 
by AI techniques (e.g., chemometrics, machine learning, data fusion) for the recognition of different kinds of 
materials (including some plastics/polymers) and coupled with in Process Analytical Technologies (+ own 
software platform). Patents in NIR or HSI based devices (VISUM)
2.3 Summary 
KEY ELEMENT OF THE IMPACT SECTION 
SPECIFIC NEEDS EXPECTED RESULTS D & E & C MEASURES 
Viable technologies 
enabling companies to: 
Meet mandatory 2025 and 
2030 circularity targets 
which limit landfilling & 
incineration, require 
separate sorting of textiles, 
and require minimum 
content of recycled plastics 
in packaging, 
Successful pilots on the 3 waste streams : 
complex textiles, tyres, and hoses waste 
r-PET high quality production for pilot 
series of tyres, clothing, hoses  
KPIs that meet industry needs in terms of 
yields, processing time, cost, etc. (page 6) 
Process Design Kits to enable construction 
of sorting and  r-PET production plants after 
the project 
IT Decision -Support Platform  for waste 
managers 
Dissemination to convince and involve 
stakeholders via direct outreach, process design 
kits, IT decision -support platform, guidelines, 
blueprints, intelligence bulletins,  
newsletters, workshops, conferences, etc. 
Involvement in public-private partnerships 
Synergies with other EU funded projects: 
symbiosis meetings 
10 Publications in peer-reviewed journals 
Exploit.: The 9 exploitation partners expect to 
generate ~500M€ of revenues by 2031. 
0 k€
100,000 k€
200,000 k€
300,000 k€
400,000 k€
500,000 k€
600,000 k€
2026 2027 2018 2029 2030 2031
INDITEX Sales revenue of r-PET
clothing/garments
IRIS Technological transfer and licensing
SYNERGIES Sales revenue from treatment of end-
of-life clothing
IPOINT Licensing of software modules +
Consulting services
ESTATO Sales revenue from recovered textile
fraction
KORDSA Sales revenue of r-PET yarns
CARBIOS Revenue from licensing, enzymes sale
and technical support
EXPLOITATION PHASE
END OF UPSCALING PHASE
CL6 -2021 -CIRCBIO -01 -04  CONFIDENTIAL  WHITECYCLE  
PART B  28 
Reduce GHG emissions to 
meet mandatory Fit-for-55 
climate targets, 
Meet growing demand for 
r-PET which already 
exceeds production 
capability via mechanical 
recycling 
FAIR data 
LCA and LCC for the 3 use-cases 
12 brand-owners, 3 PET manufacturers, 
and 3 large -scale waste managers  / 
recycling equipment manufacturers sign 
agreements for technology adoption 
Communication to the general public, 
scientific, research and industrial communities 
via social media, public website, press releases, 
video, interviews in popular media, transfer of 
data and biographies of two partners to training 
programmes. 
 
TARGET GROUPS OUTCOMES IMPACTS 
Waste management companies 
PET manufacturers 
Recycling equipment 
manufacturers  
Brand-owners whose products 
contain PET 
Researchers 
Circular Economy Training 
programmes 
165 direct jobs created as a first exploit. step 
Licence to 3 major PET producers by 2026 
1 industrial scale enzymatic r-PET production 
plant by 2026 and 10 by 2031 
Sorting technologies implemented in at least 3 
waste managers by 2030 
2 Mt r-PET produced by 2030 to meet needs of 
new EU regulations 
Full circular value chains in Europe 
Prosperous, sustainable, and 
vibrant EU circular economy 
2.06 Mt CO2eq emissions avoided 
1.80 Mt PET landfilling avoided 
Ability to meet 2025 and 2030 EU 
targets and to set more stringent 
targets leading up to 2050  for the 
full circularity of plastics and climate 
neutrality. 
 
3 Quality and efficiency of the implementation
3.1 Work plan and resources 
Table 3.1a List of work packages 
W
P Work Package Title Lead  Lead # Person-
month 
Start 
Month 
End 
month 
0 Project and data management and reporting to the EC MICHELIN 1 86.05 1 48 
1 PET identification and separation from complex 
waste (clothing, hoses, and ELT) IRIS 1 185.65 1 36 
2 Pre-treatment of separated PET from complex waste IFTH 8 75.75 1 36 
3 Enzymatic depolymerization and monomer 
purification CARBIOS 3 59.50 1 48 
4 Production of r-PET-based tyre-cord fabrics, lay-flat 
hose grade and technical clothing grade yarns KORDSA 4 120.10 12 34 
5 
Technical textile containing products validation at 
demo and industrial scale – tyres, lay-flat hoses, and 
garments 
MICHELIN 1 45.00 23 48 
6 LCA, social-LCA, LCC, Market studies, business 
modelling and digitisation HVL 12 130.45 1 48 
7 Dissemination, Communication, Strategic 
Intelligence, Outreach and Replication AXELERA 9 53.50 1 48 
   Total PM 756.00   
 
Figure 14 : PERT diagram 
WP1 PET identification and separation from complex 
waste (clothing, hoses, and ELT) [M1-M36]
Leader:  IRIS Partners: IRIS, PPRIME, SYNERGIES, 
ESTATO, MICHELIN
WP2 Pre-treatment of separated PET from 
complex waste [M1-M36]
Leader: IFTH
Partners: MICHELIN, CARBIOS, PPRIME
WP3 Enzymatic depolymerization and 
monomer purification [M1-M48]
Leader: CARBIOS
Partners: MICHELIN, PPRIME, IFTH
WP5 Technical textile containing products 
validation at demonstration and industrial scale 
– tyres, lay-flat hoses, and technical garments 
[M23-M48]
Leader: MICHELIN
Partners: MANDALS, INDITEX
WP6LCA, social-LCA, LCC, Market studies, business 
modelling and digitisation [M1-M48]
Leader:  HVL
Partners: HVL, IPOINT, ERASME, ALL
WP0 Project and data management and reporting to the European Commission
Leader: MICHELIN
Partners : DYNERGIE, ALL
WP7Dissemination, Communication, Strategic Intelligence, 
Outreach and Replication [M1-M48]
Leader: AXELERA
Partners : ALL WP4 Production of r-PET-based tyre-cord 
fabrics, lay-flat hose grade and technical 
clothing grade yarns [M12-M34]
Leader: KORDSA
Partners: DITF, IFTH, MICHELIN, INDITEX, 
CARBIOS
CL6 -2021 -CIRCBIO -01 -04  CONFIDENTIAL  WHITECYCLE  
PART B  29 
 
Figure 15 : GANTT chart
3.2 Capacity of participants and 
consortium as a whole 
The WHITECYCLE consortium 
consists of 15 partners of  different 
types, namely recycling 
companies, brand -owners, final 
product manufacturers, end-user 
companies, digital companies, 
deep-tech and technology provider 
companies, a public-private eco-
tech innovation network s, 
universities, and public research 
organisations. They provide good 
geographic coverage across 5 
Member States or associated 
countries: France, Germany, 
Norway, Spain, and Turkey. 
The consortium is built on the will 
to develop a circular economy of 
the PET textile contained in tyres, 
multilayer textiles, and lay-flat hoses. Each partner is expected to bring a key contribution toward this objective and 
strongly collaborate with the rest of the consortium to ensure the success of the project. 
MICHELIN, the coordinator, is a well-known international tyre manufacturer who has already been involved in 10 
EU-funded consortium projects including 1 as coordinator, the previously mentioned BLACKCYCLE. MICHELIN 
will bring its knowledge in tyre manufacturing, collection, and recycling but also its scientific excellence in the fields 
of PET recognition on complex textile waste, textile waste shaping processes, fibre and matrix electrostatic separation 
Figure 16 : The project provides a good coverage of the EU territory 
CL6 -2021 -CIRCBIO -01 -04  CONFIDENTIAL  WHITECYCLE  
PART B  30 
and PET pre -treatment). MICHELIN will also 
provide key infrastructure to the project, such as 
material transformation process (extrusion, 
treatment, calendering) tyre manufacturing, 
material and tyre test machine s and material 
analysis (MEB, SEM, IR…) . Its core strategy 
includes transferring the results of 
BLACKCYCLE and WHITECYCLE to their 
factories to use currently impossible to recycle 
fractions of old tyres (PET, carbon black, etc.) to 
make new tyres on a large scale before 2030. 
MANDALS, a leading lay-flat hose manufacturer, 
has already been involved in 1 FP7 -funded 
consortium project. The company will oversee the 
use of recycled PET -textile in the production of 
lay-flat hoses and will especially study the 
adhesion behaviour of the outer layer made of 
thermoplastic or rubber material on the recycled 
PET-textile. MANDALS ’s core strategy is to 
make these  composite hoses out of end -of-life 
materials on a large scale. 
INDITEX, the third brand-owner, is a European clothing manufacturing company with 8 brands, including ZARA, 
Pull&Bear and ZARA home. The company will provide key infrastructure to the project, such as industrial scale 
weaving, knitting equipment. Its strategy is to ensure design for recycling of its clothing and to use recycled textile 
materials in its new clothing lines. INDITEX will also provide known production wastes to the WP1 to be recycled. 
CARBIOS provides a key missing link needed to make the PET value chain circular. Its enzymatic recycling process 
for PET plastic and textile waste  is a world first and led to a publication in Nature followed by various industrial 
partnerships with global leaders such as NOVOZYMES, L’OREAL and NESTLE WATERS. This most innovative 
SME “Unicorn” was granted 11 patents in 2020 including seven in the United States and now owns 38 patent families. 
It is turning its disruptive innovation into bankable solutions. It’s successful capital increase of 27 million euros (July 
2020) is further evidence of this. The company will adapt its depolymerization and monomer purification processes 
for composite textile and complex textile clothing waste considering the higher amounts of impurities in theses 
feedstocks than in plastic packaging waste. CARBIOS will also provide key infrastructure to the project, such as a 
preindustrial unit (2 t of PET waste treated per week in a 20 m3 reactor, TRL 7) inaugurated in Sept. 2021. Equipment 
for pre -treatment, depolymerisation purification of terephthalic acid (TA), purification of mono ethylene glycol 
(MEG) and purification of coproduct will be installed at the same site. Its business model has begun bearing fruit and 
is based on licensing its technology to PET producers who will build/operate industrial plants to produce r-PET first 
from simpler PET waste streams and after WHITECYCLE, even from the most complex PET wastes. 
KORDSA, the leading manufacturer of industrial nylon and polyester yarn, tyre cord fabric and single end cord, has 
already been involved in 2 H2020 -funded consortium projects. The company will lead WP4, in collaboration with 
DITF, to convert the monomers produced by CARBIOS into yarns and cords delivered to MICHELIN, MANDALS 
and INDITEX. The company will be responsible to produce r -PET based tyre cords and other use -cases but also 
work in close collaboration with DITF for the polymerization and IFTH for the lab-spinning to ensure the requested 
quality of the material used in this production.  
ESTATO is a certified (ISO 9001 and 50001) waste disposal specialist with numerous regional and (inter)national 
customers who has already been involv ed in the EU -funded consortium project BLACKCYCLE with MICHELIN 
as coordinator. ESTATO will supply the PET waste from tyres and will be involved in the development of the new 
sorting technologies and its implementation for retrieving PET from ELT shreds in  collaboration with MICHELIN. 
They plan to upscale and broadly implement tyre separation and sorting to provide secondary raw materials to PET 
manufacturers who will use CARBIOS’s enzymatic recycling process. 
SYNERGIES is a company working alongside collectors and sorters of textiles, for the sorting and recycling of end 
of life clothing waste, ultimately moving toward a full circular economy for textile s and footwear. SYNERGIES as 
the end-user of the multilayer sorting technology developed by IRIS will collaborate with this company to adapt the 
equipment to meet the industrial standards. Concomitantly, SYNERGIES is investing into an industrial-scale line for 
the separation of mono -layer clothing textile waste. SYNERGIES plans to upscale and broadly implemen t EoL 
clothing and footwear sorting to provide secondary raw materials to PET manufacturers who will use CARBIOS’s 
enzymatic recycling process. 
Figure 17 : WHITECYCLE circular value chains to boost 3 
brand-owners to become circular by 2030 plus replication 
 
ELT STREAM
Collection: ESTATO
Treatment: ESTATO 
GARMENT STREAM
Collection: SYNERGIES
Identification: IRIS
SUSTAINABILITY 
ANALYSIS
LCA: IPOINT
Social LCA / SSH: ERASME
LCC: IPOINT
FAIR DATA PROTOCOL: HVL
Communication & 
Dissemination
AXELERA
Current material
stream
Material stream
created by 
WHITECYCLE
TEXTILE PRODUCTION
Lab-spinning: IFTH
Industrial spinning: KORDSA
Twisting/Dipping/Weaving: KORDSA
ENZYMATIC RECYCLING
Pre-treatment: IFTH & MICHELIN
Depolymerisation & Purification: CARBIOS
Polymerisation: DITF
GARMENT 
PRODUCTION
INDITEX
LAY-FLAT HOSE 
PRODUCTION
MANDALS
TYRE 
PRODUCTION
MICHELIN
SORTING PROCESS
Technological development: PPRIME, SYNERGIES
Demonstrator: MICHELIN & SYNERGIES
Project management
MICHELIN DYNERGIE
BRAND OWNERS
CL6 -2021 -CIRCBIO -01 -04  CONFIDENTIAL  WHITECYCLE  
PART B  31 
IRIS is a deep-tech and technology provider company which has already been involved in 102 EU-funded consortium 
projects including 39 as coordinator. The company will partner with SYNERGIES TLC to develop the automatic 
identification and dedicated recognition process for the multilayer textiles . They plan to upscale and equipment to 
the companies that will perform l arge-scale plastic and textile separation and sorting to provide secondary raw 
materials to PET manufacturers who will use CARBIOS’s enzymatic recycling process. 
IPOINT is a leading provider of software and consulting for environmental and social product compliance, and 
sustainability having tens of thousands of client companies around the globe. This organisation has already been 
involved in 2 EU -funded consortium projects including 1 as coordinator. IPOINT will bring its expertise and tools 
to the consortium for the LCC and LCA of the complete value chain. 
DITF, founded in 1921, is the European largest textile research centre and performs public research, industrial 
projects and services for all organizations involved in fibres and textile in many sectors thanks to its research staff of 
ca. 300 employees. DITF has already been involved in 23 EU-funded consortium projects including 3 as coordinator. 
The research centre will study the complete polymerisation process using the monomers produced by CARBIOS and 
then supply IFTH and KORDSA in polymers. So DITF will work in close collaboration with these 3 entities. 
IFTH is an industrial technical centre  dedicated to support pro gress in the textile and clothing sectors. This 
establishment has already been involved in 10 EU-funded consortium projects including 1 as coordinator. IFTH will 
develop the amorphization process vital for the further enzymatic depolymerization performed by CARBIOS. IFTH 
will also be responsible for the r-PET cords production by melt spinning at pilot scale in collaboration with KORDSA. 
PPRIME is a research unit of the CNRS created in 2010 and composed of more than 600 people whose research 
themes concern the Sciences for Engineering and Materials Physics. The laboratory will partner with MICHELIN to 
develop a fibre and matrix electrostatic separation process relying on vibratory, aerodynamic, and electrostatic 
properties for the material stream from ESTATO and SYNERGIES. 
ERASME is an interdisciplinary programme, labelled in recognition of its expertise in sustainable development and 
co-financed by the European Union as part of the Jean Monnet program of Erasmus +, that brings together scientific 
and civil society expertise to advance sustainable development in the EU. This research organisation will oversee the 
social acceptance analysis, market studies and business modelling. 
HVL is a university and research organization dedicated to solving the societal challenges of sustainability. HVL has 
already been involved in 11 EU -funded consortium projects including 1 as coordinator. It will perform the social 
acceptance analysis and will lead the consortium in setting-up, implementing and sharing FAIR data protocol. 
AXELERA is the French cluster at the crossroads of the chemical and environmental sectors gathering 367 members. 
This cluster has already been involved in 8 EU-funded consortium projects. The cluster links innovators and helps 
them to de-risk and implement disruptive ecotechnologies, build new relationships and communicate effectively 
across sectors and for a general audience. AXELERA acquired expertise in terms of communicatio n, dissemination 
and networking and will bring these competencies into the consortium. 
DYNERGIE is a SME specialized in managing European R&D project, alongside the coordinator MICHELIN. 
DYNERGIE will organize the project consortium meetings, the reporting to the EC and the overall governance of 
the project.  DYNERGIE has participated in 2 H2020 projects. 
Table 3.1b: Work package description 
WP 
number 0 Lead beneficiary MICHELIN 
WP title Project and data management and reporting to the European Commission 
Part. 
number 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 
Short 
name of 
part. 
MICHELIN 
CARBIOS 
KORDSA 
ESTATO 
SYNERGIES 
DITF 
IFTH 
AXELERA 
PPRIME 
ERASME 
IRIS 
HVL 
IPOINT 
DYNERGIE 
INDITEX 
PM per 
part. 
23.00 6.00 2.00 3.00 8.00 2.00 2.00 4.60 0.45 1.00 3.00 5.00 3.00 20.00 3.00 
Start 
month M1 End month M48 
Objectives: The WP0 aims to develop an effective and comprehensive technical, administrative, and financial management to 
ensure the successful execution of the WHITECYCLE project. Specific objectives will be:  
• To ensure the achievement of all project’s objectives on time, quality, and costs.  
• To manage and coordinate smoothly and efficiently the WHITECYCLE partners, ensuring the achievement of 
the specific objectives from each of the WPs.  
CL6 -2021 -CIRCBIO -01 -04  CONFIDENTIAL  WHITECYCLE  
PART B  32 
• To communicate a high-quality project reporting to the EC.  
• To manage the different stakeholders through the Advisory Board. 
Task 0.1: Technical management – Duration: [M1-M48] - Leader: MICHELIN - Part.: ALL 
The Project Management will be conducted to coordinate the technical efforts and outputs of the partners. Technical 
management meetings will be held on a regular basis to ensure the coordination between the related WPs and activities. The 
project progress,  i.e., risk management, technical results, and deliverable preparation, will be monitored to comply with 
technical milestones, intermediate outputs and eventually project objectives. MICHELIN will set up a portal with the templates 
for all project’s related documents such as deliverables, technical follow-up tracking actual versus planned project progress or 
slide show presentations (D8.1). 
Task 0.2: Administrative and financial management – Duration: [M1-M48] - Leader: DYNERGIE - Part.: ALL 
The objective of this task is to ensure that the contract terms are followed and when necessary updated. The governance 
structure, as well as the communication flows and methods will be presented in the kick-off meeting. DYNERGIE will define 
templates that allow participants to provide inputs for the reporting in an efficient way while maintaining details, accuracy, 
and completeness. After each review meeting, an internal report on the project’s progress will be prepared and distributed to  
all partners (D8.2). 
DYNERGIE will act as the main contact point and monitor any contract amendment which might be requested by the 
Consortium for submission to the EC. DYNERGIE will deliver a progress report on a semi-annual basis and a detailed report 
at the end of every period. Moreover, MICHELIN will distribute EC funds amongst partners according to the Grant agreement. 
Task 0.3: Development and implementation of the FAIR data management plan - Duration: [M1-M48] - Leader: HVL 
- Part.: ALL 
The objective is to ensure overall data governance adhering to the FAIR principles at implementation level, i.e., enabling 
machine-actionability and human -readability. This includes the identification of all relevant data, the organization of data 
processing standards, and the assignment of responsibilities. The workflow in brief is the following. Findability: Creating an 
inventory of all project data and organize data along with content into data objects. Assign data objects with persistent 
identifiers. Ac cessibility: Define access procedures and execution rights. Interoperability: Describe data and metadata 
standards for the data objects using existing standards, taxonomies, and ontologies (all tagged with persistent identifiers).  
Reusability: Assign licen ses for reusing data. Ensure dissemination of data to different stakeholders. Technical realization: 
RDF, SPARQL. A blueprint of the FAIR implementation protocol will be developed for re -use in similar industrial context 
(upload to the EOSC platform as an example; D0.7). This includes reference implementation files for data sets based on 
existing industrial standards, classifications and ontologies for chemical substances, industrial processes, and societal use. This 
also embraces the linking of data with open vocabularies and standards. 
Task 0.4: Quality and risk control – Duration: [M1-M48] - Leader: DYNERGIE - Part.: ALL 
A quality policy will be validated by the Steering Committee covering all aspects related to quality assurance and practical 
management of the project. The main issues addressed will include technical and non -technical risk management (including 
critical path and contingency plans), project SWOT, communication and quality control activities, gender, societal, and ethical 
issues (D.0.4). For instance, it will clearly state internal processes related to standards of documents, proofreading, clear 
validation workflow for the approval of the deliverables, reports, dissemination tools like the platform. The monthly follow -
up of the Ke y Performance Indicators will allow to evaluate the performance of the project and its impact. MICHELIN will 
check on a regularly basis (at list every quarter) the fit of the deliverables with the Gantt of WHITECYCLE project and be 
guarantor of the corrective action plan of all WPs (in hand with WP leaders and partners involved) to deliver at the right time. 
Task 0.5: Advisory board – Duration: [M1-M48] - Leader: MICHELIN - Part.: ALL 
An Advisory Board (AB) will be set -up and composed of consumer associations, European tyre recycling associations, such 
as ALIAPUR, brand owners in different sectors using textiles and plastics, a PET manufacturer, two universities (WESTERN 
SYDNEY UNIVERSI TY, UNIVERSIDAD DE LEON ), one consumer association, one public authority responsible for 
circularity regulations, one respected think -tank making recommendations for circularity policies, such as the OECD . Each 
member of the AB will have to sign a Non-Divulgation Agreement. This group of experts will be invited to at least one General 
Assembly per year, to give their feedback about the project achievements (technical, economic, social aspects) and will provide 
their feedback about local needs and market potential in their respective countries. Report of the AB is integrated to the progress 
technical deliverable (D0.2 through D0.5). 
Task 0.6: IPR safeguarding – Duration: [M1-M48] - Leader: DYNERGIE - Part.: ALL 
Aside from the IPR issues to be covered by the CA, additional work needs to be done in this area to make the most of project 
results. Main activities will be the support and assessment for Licensing, Partnering, and Joint Exploitation Agreements; 
Helping in the negotiation and drafting of the bi -lateral or multi -lateral agreements necessary to exploit project results; 
Assessment of strategies on 3rd party licensing, first rights of refusal, minimum production quotas, etc.; and patenting of 
project results. A detailed list of each partner background will be included in the exploitation plan and updated in further 
iterations. These IPR activities will be carried out by DYNERGIE. 
 
WP number 1 Lead beneficiary IRIS 
WP title PET identification and separation from complex waste (clothing, hoses, and ELT) 
Part. number 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 
CL6 -2021 -CIRCBIO -01 -04  CONFIDENTIAL  WHITECYCLE  
PART B  33 
Short name 
of part. 
MICHELIN 
CARBIOS 
KORDSA 
ESTATO 
SYNERGIES 
DITF 
IFTH 
AXELERA 
PPRIME 
ERASME 
IRIS 
HVL 
IPOINT 
DYNERGIE 
INDITEX 
PM per part. 35.00   17.50 36.00    37.15  60.00     
Start month M1 End month M36 
Objectives: he objectives of this WP1 are to: 
• Carry out methodology development to characterise key materials contained in clothing waste feedstocks and 
detect those that are rich in PET through HIS, LIBS, NIR, hyperspectral technologies, etc.  
• Preliminary process upscale to reach TRL5 with the design & implementation of pilot-scale sorting system:  
o On complex clothing waste recognition and sorting : to develop a semi-automatised identification and 
separation system to constitute 80% PET content waste. 
o On PET composite fibre/matrix separation to produce sorted PET from ELT, ELH, coated fabrics. 
• To test the whole demonstration loop, whereby 2 t of clothing waste, 0.3 t of ELH and 10 t of ELT are processed 
to retrieve 0.5 t from clothing preparation and 0.8 t from electrostatic separation of sorted PET. 
• Process upscale to reach TRL6 up to 8 with the development of pre-industrial scale process  
o On the clothing sorting system consisting of identification and preparatio n system, capable to handle 
20 kt/year of clothing. This system will be tested at SYNERGIES waste sorting facilities. 
o On the physical sorting unit able to produce 60 kg/h of sorted PET from dirty textile extracted from 
complex composites (ELT, hoses).  
• To define the downstream process for unselected non-PET and low PET content materials to improve LCA. 
Task 1.1: LIBS NIIR and hyperspectral technologies and methodology development for the characterization of clothing 
waste feedstock, reaching TRL 3-5 – Duration: [M1-M8] Leader: IRIS - Part.: SYNERGIES 
SYNERGIES will provide complex clothing waste through manual sorting. The purpose of this task is the identification and 
content measurement complex multilayer clothing textiles such as stuffed clothing, coated textile, and membranes among 
others. The monitoring prototype applied in T1.5 will encompass HSI and LIBS technologies with an innovative advanced 
chemometrics approach and AI modelling strategy to define fast and  accurate models to elaborate data and provide real -time 
identification textile composition to identify PET based clothing textiles. Two main optical and spectroscopic techniques will 
be assessed by IRIS (i) Vis -NIR and SWIR HSI and (ii) LIBS. Different co nfiguration modes will be tested as absorption, 
diffusion reflectance, interactance and transflectance.  
Additionally, offline mono- and multilayer reference samples will be created by SYNERGIES, chemically characterized by a 
lab, and used by IRIS (i) to a ssess the accuracy in the materials identification by the technologies and the required data 
processing for each case and (ii) to develop preliminary AI hybrid models based on chemometric and machine learning 
principles to provide compositional information. Special attention will be given to PET as the exact content of this material is 
required for the discrimination. The production of model samples can be considered to fill the gaps in the range of PET content. 
Task 1.2: Explorat ory testing of other available technologies for the chemical characterization of key materials 
contained in clothing waste feedstock – Duration: [M1-M6] Leader: MICHELIN - Part.: IRIS 
Through bibliography and testing at MICHELIN or via subcontractors, the other technological paths such as Terahertz 
imaging, X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy are positioned vs . LIBS technology pursued as the main recognition technology. 
Their efficiency will be studied on the 3 feedstocks (coated, multilayer and stuffing). 
If they are relevant for the PET identification, they will either be considered as back-up (in case LIBS doesn’t give satisfaction) 
or be used as an additional system to reinforce LIBS analysis (reducing risk of wrong sorting). 
Task 1.3: TRL increase of the processes for the identification and sorting of complex textile waste feedstocks – Reach 
TRL3-5 – Duration: [M5-M14] - Leader: SYNERGIES - Part.: IRIS, MICHELIN, PPRIME 
Subtask 1. 3.1: Manual-based process upscale of complex clothing waste recognition and sorting  - leader: IRIS - Part.: 
SYNERGIES - Based on the results obtained in T1.1, the hybrid models will be finalised, and a selection of hardware and 
software specifications will be established. The optical systems, the enclosure and optomechanical parts will be designed using 
mechanical CAD tools with input from ray-tracing software (e.g., Zemax OpticStudio). The core devices will be optimized to 
identify the main target materials in terms of spectral and dimensional resolution, lighting system, scanned size, speed. 
Additionally, a preliminary software platform will be developed to acquire, model the data, and display results. In this sense, 
a TRL5 test bench (hardware and software) will be designed and delivered to be tested (offline and manually) in SYNERGIES. 
Trials using characterised samples provided by SYNERGIES will be used for the validation of the  models. Part of the PET 
feedstock that will be provided to WP2 will be sorted during these trials. 
Subtask 1.3.2: Upscale of the s haping processes of the  sorted PET-containing textile waste - leader: SYNERGIES - Part.: 
MICHELIN, PPRIME – SYNERGIES will be designing a set of processes to be applied on the multilayer clothing textile waste 
to prepare it for the PET identification/characterization phase. These processes will be tested on the actual waste feedstock to 
assess their capability to separate  all the different forms of clothing items present in the considered waste (stuffing, fabric , 
contaminants e.g., zippers, buttons, etc.). Based on test results, SYNERGIES will invest in the different processing machines. 
CL6 -2021 -CIRCBIO -01 -04  CONFIDENTIAL  WHITECYCLE  
PART B  34 
Subtask 1.3.3: TRL increase of the electrostatic processes of fibre matrix waste sorting for hoses and tyres – leader: PPRIME 
- Part.: MICHELIN - On the existing PPRIME lab scale sorting equipment, the operating conditions will be optimized to reach 
the maximum theoretic al flow rate which is 5 to 15 kg/h. Some additional stages (sieving, decompressing, or shaking 
operations) will be tested before the electrostatic treatment to maximize the quantity of PET recovered. ESTATO process will 
also be tested with the MANDALS hoses to recover the PET. The separation performance to separate the PET from the matrix 
will be evaluated and compared to ELT. The process parameters will be optimised to maximise the PET recovery. 
Task 1.4: Pilot scale process loop activities – PET concentration increases from the complex PET -containing waste 
feedstock through sorting and separation processes – Duration: [M12 -M14] - Leader: SYNERGIES - Part.: 
MICHELIN, ESTATO, PPRIME 
SYNERGIES will provide 2 t of used clothing containing >80% of PET:  
• The developed LIBS technology will be used to sort 0.5 t complexes cloths. 
• 1.5 t will be manually sorted (based on the label tag) or using NIR detection. 
ESTATO will produce of 2 t of dirty textile from ELT and 300 kg from granulated hoses.  
• Optimization of a lab equipment for tribo-electrostatic separation of PET; production of 600 kg of PET.  
• Adaptation of electrostatic technique to recover PET from granulated ELH; if possible, production of 100 kg of 
PET.  
• Feasibility tests of tribo -electrostatic separation of PET from certain classes of clothing textiles . If it works, 
production of 100 kg of PET fibres. 
Task 1.5: TRL increase of the processes for the separation and sorting of PET-containing complex waste feedstocks –
TRL 6-8 – Duration: [M12-M36] Leader: MICHELIN - Part.: ESTATO, SYNERGIES, PPRIME, IRIS 
Subtask 1.5.1: Design, development, and implementation at SYNERGIES’s facilities of an industrial-scale recognition, sorting 
and shaping system for complex clothing feedstocks – Duration: [M12-M24] Leader: SYNERGIES - Part.: IRIS - The final 
monitoring prototype for PET recognition will be a system including a conveyor to work in inline conditions and will provide 
a real-time identification of multilayer textile clothes. Based on the requirements and specifications of SYNERGIES, IRIS will 
redesign and upgrade the TRL5 system gathered after T1.4 and operational parameters (hardware and software) for the upscale 
conditions and will deliver it to be integrated into a SYNERGIES dedicated line for validation. The physical stabilisation and 
presentation of the sampled object to the sensing device will be addressed as well as the uniformity of the optical path-length, 
the fluctuations in the atmosphere due to thermal gradients and the presence of dust and undesired particles. T he signal-to-
noise (SNR) of the instrument will be optimized through mechanical, electrical and sensor stabilisations.  
In collaboration with SYNERGIES and the monolayer sorting equipment provider, tests will be run to adapt IRIS recognition 
system to the plant sorting system. Data generated by the monitoring device will be made available to the sorting system, 
ensuring that the monitoring unit latencies are compatible and that both are synchronized. The option of an  independent all-
in-one system including input flow stream, material identification and recognition and physical sorting will be studied as well. 
Subtask 1.5.2: Design, development, and implementation at ESTATO’s facilities of a pre-industrial-scale sorting system for 
ELT feedstock – Duration: [M12-M36] Leader: MICHELIN - Part.: ESTATO, PPRIME,  
Pre-industrial upscale of the sorting system defined in task 1.2.2 to reach sorting capacity of 30 to 60 kg/h: 
• Technical specifications will be written by PPRIME with input from ESTATO for the implantation and 
MICHELIN for industrial processes. The design study of the equipment will be done by MICHELIN. 
• The equipment will be realized by a subcontractor managed by MICHELIN with the assistance of PPRIME 
• The equipment will be commissioned at the subcontractor location by MICHELIN and PPRIME and installed 
at one of the ESTATO facilities. MICHELIN will provide support during initial equipment operations. 
• Process parameters are tuned with a first trial with real waste coming from ESTATO facilit ies. Key process 
parameters (fibres content, throughput) are measured. 
• 1 t of PET fibres are sorted from 10 t of ELT. 
 
WP number 2 Lead beneficiary IFTH 
WP title Pre-treatment of separated PET from complex waste 
Part. number 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 
Short name of 
part. 
MICHELIN 
CARBIOS 
KORDSA 
ESTATO 
SYNERGIES 
DITF 
IFTH 
AXELERA 
PPRIME 
ERASME 
IRIS 
HVL 
IPOINT 
DYNERGIE 
INDITEX 
PM per part. 36.00 0.10     36.00  3.65       
Start month M1 End month M36 
Objectives: The objectives for this WP2 are for the ELT and clothing PET waste to:  
- Pilot-scale study of the amorphization process of PET -based wastes containing pollutants (rubber, textile 
coating, non-PET fibres…) (TRL 5).  
- Define and implement an industrial-scale process for the pre-shaping and amorphization of PET-based waste to 
be compatible for enzymatic depolymerization (TRL 7)  
CL6 -2021 -CIRCBIO -01 -04  CONFIDENTIAL  WHITECYCLE  
PART B  35 
- Develop an analytical protocol to characterize amorphous/crystal ratio of PET to validate the efficiency of the 
amorphization process. 
Task 2.1: Providing pre-treatedanalytical sample furniture for WP3 – Duration: [M1-M12] - Leader: MICHELIN - 
Part.: IFTH 
Pre-screening of amorphization process with neat PET samples from clothing and fabrics f rom ELT (resp. clothing and 
technical grade) will be amorphized by the mean of the 3 different paths considering intrinsic properties of polymers i.e., IV 
and textile shape. 1 kg of analytical sample (from each waste) should be provided for depolymerization and prelimin ary 
purification trials in WP3. To secure the 1 tonne scale of the WP2, the work should be carried out at different scales (1 kg to 
10 kg for pre -screening model).  The robustness, efficiency and environmental impact s of the 3 methodologies  will be 
compared. 
Subtask 2.1.1: Pre-shaping process (from ELT & garment PET ) - For each amorphization process, it could be necessary to 
convert the fibres into a suitable shape allowing to withstand the selected process. The shaping process must be defined and 
tested. It could be done using densification for extrusion purpose or non-woven process on the IFTH pilot’s installation to have 
a continuous and cohesive material surface. 
Subtask 2.1.2: Lab Scale activated gas path  (IFTH) - Highly energetic species and high temperature gas is known to lead to 
both functionalization and polymorphism (including amorphization) mechanisms. Amorphized morphologies will be studied 
using a combination of time exposure and cooling. Post shaping as cutting of the treated material will be done before the 
following step of depolymerization. 
Subtask 2.1.3: Lab Scale extrusion path (IFTH / MICHELIN) - The shaped mixture will be amorphized with extrusion screw 
technology with existing equipment. It will be micronized and supplied to CARBIOS to assess the depolymerization efficiency. 
Subtask 2.1.4: Lab Scale heat/quench path (M ICHELIN) – Thermal route could also be conducted through combination of 
heating (infrared, radiation...) and consequent quenching. 
Task 2.2: Pilot-scale study of amorphization of PET sample containing contaminants (rubber, textile coating etc.) from 
WP1 and for WP3 – Duration: [M13-M15]- Leader: IFTH - Part.: MICHELIN 
Subtask 2.2.1: Validation of the amorphization processes (of neat PET tested in 2.1) with PET sample containing contaminants 
from WP1 - Several samples, of about 100g, containing more than 80% PET should be provided to WP3 to evaluate enzymatic 
depolymerization efficiency. Amorphisation will be tested on samples of different purities and shapes (clothing stuffing; coated 
textile and fabric parts of ELT): 80% PET – 20% Rubber/ 90% PET – 10% Rubber/ 95% PET – 5% Rubber. This leads to 
selection of the more suitable process for demonstration-scale. 
Subtask 2.2.2: Pilot up-scale of the selected amorphization process  - The lab-scale processes and process parameters defined 
in task 2.1. and 2.2.1 are deployed to a pilot scale on dedicated installation either on IFTH facilities ( non-woven, plasma 
treatment, extrusion) or on subcontractor facilities. 1 ton of amorphized PET (a-PET) will be available for WP3. 
Task 2.3: Preindustrial upscale of the shaping and amorphization processes of PET waste to prepare it for the 
depolymerization process – Duration: [M14-M36] - Leader: MICHELIN - Part.: IFTH, CARBIOS 
The shaping and amorphization technologies selected in the task 2.2 will be deployed in a new preindustrial scale equipment 
in MICHELIN’s facilities, able to run at 30 to 60 kg/h.  This will be done based on the different  industrial equipment and 
facilities selected during the previous tasks. 
Task 2.4: Characterization (transversal task) of PET-based wastes to determine their properties and amorphous state 
according to the main transformation steps – Duration: [M1-M32] - Leader: IFTH - Part.: MICHELIN 
A protocol using complementary analysis methodology is developed to characterize amorphous/crystalline ratio of PET mixes 
based on differential scanning calorimetry, infrared spectroscopy (IR, Raman) and microscopy (numerical, MEB) on samples. 
Indirect methodology using standard PET dyeing recipe may also be used to assess PET amorphous state.  
 
WP number 3 Lead beneficiary CARBIOS 
WP title Enzymatic depolymerization and monomer purification 
Part. number 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 
Short name of 
part. 
MICHELIN 
CARBIOS 
KORDSA 
ESTATO 
SYNERGIES 
DITF 
IFTH 
AXELERA 
PPRIME 
ERASME 
IRIS 
HVL 
IPOINT 
DYNERGIE 
INDITEX 
PM per part. 4.00 55.00     0.50         
Start month M1 End month M48 
Objectives: The objectives for this WP3 are:  
- Determine the maximum rate of impurities in composite waste (tyres & hoses) and complex clothing to be 
provided by WP1 thanks to samples prepared in WP2 to achieve a sufficient enzymatic depolymerization yield 
(75-80%). 
- Perform enzymatic depolymerization of PET contained in ELT and clothing waste feedstock at pilot scale (1m3 
reactor) by processing 0.6 tonne (ELT/ELH) and 0.4 tonne (clothing waste) of pre-treated PET from WP2.  
- Develop a purification process suitable to produce high purity monomers from complex mixed waste with 
numerous impurities. Produce 200kg of purified monomers from each feedstock at pilot scale for WP4. 
CL6 -2021 -CIRCBIO -01 -04  CONFIDENTIAL  WHITECYCLE  
PART B  36 
- Assess best end-of life options for impurities filtered out of the reaction mixture at pilot scale 
- Provide 1-2 t of purified monomers from high PET content waste for WP4 to achieve validation of recycled 
PET quality for high demanding applications (tyres) at preindustrial scale 
Task 3.1: Impact analysis of the presence of impurities in complex clothing and ELT waste feedstocks on the enzymatic 
depolymerization step and first purification steps at lab scale – Duration: [M 1-M17] - Leader: CARBIOS - Part.: 
MICHELIN, IFTH 
The aim of this task will be to find the right equilibrium between fineness of sorting/separation performed in WP1, accessibility 
of PET after pre-treatment performed in WP2, and enzymatic  efficiency. For each feedstock, CARBIOS will perform 
depolymerization tests at lab scale (50 g in 500 mL reactor) on samples with various PET/impurities ratio to determine the 
optimal sorting parameters and validate the depolymerization parameters. The pa rameters optimised for high PET content 
textile waste will be used at first: 60 °C, 200 g PET / L, 2 mg enzyme / g PET to target at least 75% depolymerization for ELT 
feedstock and 80% depolymerization for clothing waste feedstock (based on preliminary test results with a pre-treated sample 
containing 70% PET and 30% rubber from ELT). Depending on the results obtained, these parameters can be optimised such 
as the ratios of enzyme / waste / water and temperature. For each feedstock, 2 series of 3-4 samples will be treated to determine 
the sorting/pre-treatment combination leading to the highest depolymerization. For each feedstock, one sample will be selected, 
and steps of purification will be validated on selected sample by producing 70g of precipitated crude terephthalic acid. (CTA). 
The produced CTA will be characterized in CARBIOS lab (DSC, CIELab color, HPLC). 2 months are necessary for the 
validation of the purification steps.  
Task 3.2: Pilot-scale loop: enzymatic depolymerization of the PET contained in 0.6 t (ELT feedstock) and 0.4 t (clothing 
waste feedstock) at pilot scale of pre-treated PET waste from WP2 and monomer purification – Duration: [M15-M24] 
- Leader: CARBIOS - Part.: MICHELIN, 
After validation of sorting/separation and pre -treatment in WP1 and WP2, scale -up of depolymerization will be performed 
(TRL6: 100 kg waste in 1m3 reactor). CARBIOS will use the procedure determined in task 3.1 for the depolymerization. 
CARBIOS will treat the two feedstocks in series for depolymerization and purification. For each feedstock, CARBIOS will 
treat the waste in batches of 80 to 100 kg e.g., 6-7 batches for ELT feedstock and 4-5 batches for clothing waste feedstock. For 
each feedstock, the first batches will be used to validate the depolymerization scale -up and optimize the purifications steps. 
The purification scheme used for high PET content textile waste will be tested at first and optimized if necessary. CARBIOS 
will then produce 85-100 kg of TA to produce 100 kg of PET in WP4. Subsequently, 85 to 100 kg of TA will be crystalized at 
once. After purification of TA, the filtrate will be treated, 20 kg of MEG will be recovered. 2 extra months per feedstocks will 
be necessary for MEG recovery. Process simulation will be conducted on ProSimPlus to assess mass balance and energy 
performances to prepare optimized scale up. 
Task 3.3: By-products management at pilot-scale Duration: [M12-M48] - Leader: CARBIOS - Part.: MICHELIN 
CARBIOS will perform analysis on the Na2SO4 salt, subproduct of the CARBIOS process, to assess the possibility to purify 
it through the purification scheme  previously developed for high PET content waste.  Solid residues extracted after the 
depolymerization process will be characterized by MICHELIN through IR, DSC, and microanalysis on electronic microscopy. 
Environmental consequences of various scenarii of valorization will be evaluated (solid recovered fuel, cement -plant, 
pyrolysis) especially using knowle dge developed through BLACKCYCLE project. All the by -product generated will be 
valorized through the best environmental path. 
Task 3.4: Pre-industrial scale up of the enzymatic depolymerization and monomer purification processes - on simplified 
waste feedstocks (High PET content waste) Duration: [M21-M22] - Leader: CARBIOS 
CARBIOS built a pre-industrial unit (TRL7) in Clermont-Ferrand for PET enzymatic recycling and began operations in Sept. 
2021 with high PET content waste, especially coloured bottles. In the framework of WHITECYCLE, CARBIOS will produce 
2 t of monomers via its process in order that the consortium can validate its quality for high demanding applications.  
A batch of 2 t plastic waste will be depolymerized in a 20 m 3 reactor using enzymes as catalyst and water as solvent/reagent. 
After 24 h at a temperature of 60 -72°C both monomers (TANa2 form and MEG) are found in solution, with the remaining 
enzymes, unreacted PET, and impurities (labels, caps, polyamide present in some multilayer bottles, paper…). Yield of 
depolymerization will be checked by HPLC assay of TA and MEG and a mass balance after solid residual separation.  
TA and MEG will then be purified. The reaction mixture will be filtered. The filtrate containing TA and MEG will undergo 
discoloration. TA will be precipitated, filtered out, crystalized and dried. The purified TA will be characterized in CARBIOS 
lab (sublimation temperature by DSC, CIELab color, HPLC) and by external parties to determine its purity and granulometry, 
compared to commercial TA. The MEG solution will be neutralized before being distilled. The salt, byproduct of the enzymatic 
reaction, will be recovered and purified to be valorised. 
 
WP number 4 Lead beneficiary KORDSA 
WP title Production of r-PET-based tyre-cord fabrics, lay-flat hose grade and clothing grade yarns 
Part. number 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 
Short name of 
part. 
MICHELIN 
CARBIOS 
KORDSA 
ESTATO 
SYNERGIES 
DITF 
IFTH 
AXELERA 
PPRIME 
ERASME 
IRIS 
HVL 
IPOINT 
DYNERGIE 
INDITEX 
PM per part. 2.00 0.10 59.00   31.00 23.00        5.00 
CL6 -2021 -CIRCBIO -01 -04  CONFIDENTIAL  WHITECYCLE  
PART B  37 
Start month M12 End month M34 
Objectives: The objectives of this WP4 are to produce  and process r-PET from WP3 monomers that are compliant with 
the technical requirements of the reinforcement frame of tyres, hoses, and technical garments  
At pilot-scale 160 kg of r-PET (IV > 0.95 comparable with commercial PET technical grade),130 kg of r-PET yarn (tenacity 
> 7 cN/dtex), 60 kg of tyre cord quality reinforcements (through twisting and dipping processes ), 20 kg of twisted HT cords 
(compliant with lay-flat hose manufacturing purposes), 60 kg PET (IV > 0.65), 40 kg of r-PET garment yarns, 30 kg of weaved 
textile (compliant with technical garment manufacturing purposes). 
At pre-industrial scale:1,800 kg of r -PET (through a solid state polycondensation ), 250 kg to produce textile grade yarns , 
1,500 kg to produce tyre grade yarns, 600 kg of tyre cord fabric (dedicated baby roll), 210 kg yarn (to produce lay-flat hose), 
400m² of weaved multicomponent fabric (clothing). 
Task 4.1: Pilot-scale production of r -PET polymer  – Duration: [M20-M26] - Leader: DITF - Part.: KORDSA, 
CARBIOS 
Subtask 4.1.1 1 Esterification and polycondensation (DITF, KORDSA, CARBIOS)  
The existing PET synthesis process, consisting of esterification of TA to BHET and polycondensation of BHET to PET, will 
be adapted to novel recycled monomers. To eliminate the deviation caused by putative impurities, new synthesis recipes will 
be jointly developed by KORDSA and DITF. In the current case, DITF has a PET synthesis capacity from 1 kg to 25 kg per 
batch and the ability to synthesize PET from TA polymerization route methods. New synthesis recipes will jointly be developed 
by KORDSA and DITF to eliminate the potential drawbacks caused by the impurities remaining after the monomer 
purification. For this purpose, new additives will be adapted, such as  types and amounts of catalyst, processing aids, 
nucleating/coupling agents, chain extenders. Thus,  the negative effects of acid residues and unknown contamination will be 
neutralized, long-term thermal stabilization, mechanical and rheological properties will be improved. The new additive will 
enable r-PET possessing virgin-like features during polycondensation. 
Subtask 4.1.2 Solid state polycondensation (SSP) (DITF, KORDSA)  - Performed to increase the molar mass and obtain 
technical grade, the objective will be to obtain an r-PET resin featuring equivalent properties to those of virgin PET. KORDSA 
and DITF will be conducting SSP studies with 1-25 kg capacity for lab-scale studies. 
Subtask 4.1.3 Testing and characterization (before esterification, after polycondensation, after SSP) (DITF, KORDSA) - DITF 
and KORDSA will test and characteris e the recycled monomers to define their chemical grades before starting 
polycondensation tasks. Included are Head Space GC -MS analysis, melting point for TA and boiling point for EG 
determinations. Polymer properties after polycondensation and SSP will be a nalyzed by viscosity (IV), End group 
determination, rheology, GPC, NMR, DSC, TGA, XRD, MFI, moisture and color CIELab analysis. 
Task 4.2: Pilot-scale production of r-PET yarn and test and characterization (after spinning) – Duration: [M12-M30] - 
Leader: IFTH - Part.: KORDSA, MICHELIN, DITF, INDITEX 
The melt spinning behaviour of the SSP -made r-PET will be studied by the mean of a semi-industrial melt spinning line  at 
IFTH. The main parameters studied will be spinnerets, extrusion temperatures profile, throughput, drawing, relaxation. The 
aim is to prototype 20 kg to 50 kg of multifilament yarn for tyre, hoses and clothes applications at demonstrator scale and the 
characterization of the yarn compared to required specifications: tensile / shrinkage properties.  
To optimize process parameters for r-PET spinning, commercial PET with IV from 0.65 to 0.95 will be first studied.  
Subtask 4.2.1 Melt spinning at demonstration-scale (KORDSA, INDITEX, IFTH)  
• Study of the thermal and rheological behaviour of the r-PET including comparisons with commercial grades for 
HMLS, technical and clothes grades. 
• Study the spin-ability of commercial PET and the r-PET by the mean of a semi-industrial melt spinning line and 
prototyping of 100g to 50 kg of multifilament yarn.  
• Characterization compared to required specifications (HMLS, high tenacity and clothes applications) 
• Validation of the process parameters for the upscaling at task 4.5 (textile grade for clothes) 
Sub-Task 4.2.3 Testing and characterization (after spinning) (KORDSA, INDITEX, IFTH, MICHELIN): 
Thermo-mechanical properties like breaking strength, elongation, shrinkage, stiffness. 
Task 4.3: Pilot-scale production of single end cord via twisting and dipping for tyre application – Duration: [M24-M25] 
- Leader: KORDSA - Part.: IFTH 
Subtask 4.3.1. Cabling / Twisting (KORDSA) - The cabling of 1440 and 1100 dtex yarns will be performed. Cabling/Twisting 
process involves bringing together two or more plies of multi-filaments and turn around each other to make up a twisted yarn. 
Depending on yarns, propositions twisting is important for determination of the tyre co rd strength and fatigue performances.  
The r-PET will be used to produce prototype yarn at IFTH, and this yarn will be utilized in lab scale twisting. The pilot scale 
work package consists of: 
• Study on twisting with reference raw yarns that produced with commercial PET chips by IFTH for tyre grade. 
• Study on twisting with r-PET yarn yarns –twist level, and speed- optimization for tyre applications. 
• Visual observation – mechanical quality. 
Subtask 4.3.2: Tyre cord via dipping (KORDSA, IFTH) - After twisting, r-PET cords will be treated with waterborne adhesive 
formulations to afford tyre cord. Cords will be treated twice, first with a waterborne activation adhesive formulation, then with 
resorcinol-formaldehyde-latex (RFL) adhesive formulation. After  dipping, adhesive formulations are heat cured at 
temperatures above 200°C. During these two steps of adhesive treatment, appropriate tensions are applied during dipping and 
heat curing steps. KORDSA will work on the determination of the exact adhesive for mulations, number of tensions and the 
exposure time for heat curing. The demonstration-scale production will be conducted in laboratory-dipping unit.  
CL6 -2021 -CIRCBIO -01 -04  CONFIDENTIAL  WHITECYCLE  
PART B  38 
Study on SEC dipping in laboratory scale: tension, temperature, and exposure time optimization with reference raw and r-PET 
twisted yarn for tyre applications. 
Subtask 4.3.3. Testing and characterization (after twisting and after dipping) - Adhesive, tensile properties (breaking strength, 
elongation at break, elongation at a specified load, shrink force, thermal shrinkage, and stiffness) of the twisted yarns and 
dipped SEC, and fatigue of the final tyre cords will be measured. 
Task 4.4: Pre -industrial scale p roduction of r -PET polymer – Duration: [M23-M27] - Leader: MICHELIN - Part.: 
CARBIOS  
This task is carried out by Technip Zimmer (through subcontracting).  The repolymerization will take a month. 1,3 t of produced 
PET will go through an additional solid state polycondensation to increase the IV to 0.95 and make it suitable for tyre 
applications. Feedstock and (by -)products are analytically monitored. Relevant parameters are e.g., colour, viscosity, 
carboxylic end groups, DEG content. 
Task 4.5: Pre-industrial scale production of r -PET yarn and test and characterization (after spinning) – Duration: 
[M27-M30] - Leader: KORDSA - Part.: IFTH, INDITEX 
The pre-industrial scale production of HMLS consist of drying the r-PET chips with high IV, extru ding the supplied chips , 
followed by melt region, spinning line – faceplate, and winding. During the pre-industrial scale production not only the product 
properties, but also the operational efficiency, namely the spinnability, will be studied. At first, the p rocess conditions and 
operational activity optimizations will be studied with commercial high IV PET chips  with t he semi -industrial studies 
conducted by IFTH used as baseline. The optimization studies with r-PET will cover following parameters: drying conditions 
of r -PET chips, extrusion pressure and temperature profile, polymer throughput, spinnerets, drawing region speed and 
temperature profile, and operational program. The main aim prototyping of 200 to 700 kg of 1100 or 1440 dtex HMLS yarn 
for tyres and hoses applications. 
 
Subtask 4.5.1: Pre-Industrial scale spinning - HMLS production at KORDSA -Detailed study on mechanical and melt-rheology 
behaviour of r -PET will investigate melt region process.  And Operational method  will be  developed for highly effi cient 
transition between commercial and r-PET production. Spinnability study will be realized on commercial high IV PET and high 
IV r-PET by the mean of a pre-industrial scale melt spinning line and production (HT yarn and then HMLS). Prototyping 200 
to 900kg multifilament yarn will be done. Operational and process conditions will be reported and used for possible commercial 
productions. 
Subtask 4.5.2: Testing and characterization (after spinning) - The test and characterization of HMLS  yarn includes: number 
of broken filament measurement with offline fray analyser, tensile properties (breaking strength, elongation, shrinkage, linear 
density measurement), morphological and mechanical analysis with XRD, GPC, DSC, DMA instrumental analysis (IV, CEG). 
Subtask 4.5.3: 200kg textile grade production at INDITEX facilities - INDITEX will produce 200 kg of textile grade yarns. 
Task 4.6: Pre-industrial production of single end cord for tyre application, and production of weave for hose application 
and garments – Duration: [M28-M34] – Leader: KORDSA – Part.: MANDALS, MICHELIN, INDITEX 
Subtask 4.6.1: Twisting dipping on baby roll at KORDSA - The cabling of 1400 or 1100 dtex yarns supplied by IFTH will be 
performed after twisting, r-PET cords will be treated with waterborne adhesive formulations to afford tyre cord. In this work, 
KORDSA will work on the determination of the exact adhesive formulations, number of tensions and t he timespan for heat 
curing. During the studies, the inputs from Task 4.3.1 and 4.3.2 will be used as a baseline. 
• Study on twisting parameters optimization (twist level and speed), dipping parameters optimization (temperature 
profile, tension profile and exposure time) 
• Study on operational efficiency as number of breaks and broken filaments during r-PET twisting and dipping. 
• Prototyping 600kg of HMLS baby roll product from 700 kg r-PET yarn for tyre applications. 
 
Subtask 4.6.2: Testing and characterization (after twisting and dipping) - Adhesive, tensile properties (breaking strength, 
elongation shrinkage, and stiffness) of the twisted yarns and fatigue of the final tyre cords will be measured. The additional 
test at third parties will conducted for further chemical, physical and morphological analysis.  
 
Subtask 4.6.3: Weaving done at INDITEX, 400 m² of representative weaved fabric will be produced by INDITEX 
subcontractors. Mechanical performance, dyability will be measured to validate technology applicability. 
 
WP number 5 Lead beneficiary MICHELIN 
WP title Technical textile containing products validation at demonstration and industrial scale – tyres, lay-
flat hoses, and technical garments 
Part. number 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 
Short name of part. 
MICHELIN 
CARBIOS 
KORDSA 
ESTATO 
SYNERGIES 
DITF 
IFTH 
AXELERA 
PPRIME 
ERASME 
IRIS 
HVL 
IPOINT 
DYNERGIE 
INDITEX 
PM per part. 27.00              18.00 
Start month M23 End month M48 
CL6 -2021 -CIRCBIO -01 -04  CONFIDENTIAL  WHITECYCLE  
PART B  39 
Objectives: The objectives of this WP5 are to prove that r-PET is a relevant raw materials for three use cases:  
− At pilot-scale:  
−  highly technical HMLS r-PET tyre: 25 prototype tyres building trial will meet TRL5 requirement level (building 
process, geometrical sizing, and long-lasting endurance performances).  
− technical r-PET lay flat hoses by extensive testing of 25 m hose in which at least 40% of v-PET is replaced by 
r-PET.  
− as r-PET technical garment by extensive testing of 20 m2 produced at full scale.  
At pre-industrial-scale use: 
− Manufacture 100 tyres containing r-PET. Requirement tests according to the EU regulations on tyres. 
− Manufacture 1,500 m of lay-flat hoses through different weave batches and extrusion. 
− Coat 400 m2 of multicomponent fabric and manufacture of 4 lines of technical garments. 
Task 5.1: Pilot-scale use-case: Making r-PET tyres, hoses, and clothing – Duration: [M23-M33] - Leader: MICHELIN 
- Part.: MANDALS, INDITEX 
Subtask 5.1.1: Manufacture 25 tyres containing r -PET (MICHELIN) [M27-M33] Using first deliveries of few kgs of r -PET, 
lab evaluations will be launched in MICHELIN and in cooperation with evaluations driven by IFTH and KORDSA in WP4. 
The p urpose of these crossed studies will be to maximize the reliability of assessment of new recycled tyre cord for tyre 
building and tyre use. Using r -PET supplied by WP4 in M27, rubber coated fabrics will be built on laboratory drums to 
demonstrate tyre performances and assess tyre building process performance. 25 Passenger Car tyres will be built in the R&D 
pilot shop and tested in static and dynamic conditions to check their real usage properties and performances. (Geometrical 
sizing, and endurance tests on drums). Depending on gap analysis between v-PET and r-PET, thermomechanical lab evaluation 
of r-PET could be conducted. They would allow tyre calculations of sizing and multi axial stiffnesses. 
 
Subtask 5.1.2: Manufacture 25 m of lay -flat hoses (MANDALS)  [M29-M33] The first deliveries of few kg of r -PET will be 
used for bench scale tests of yarn characteristics relevant for hose performance. This includes pre-treatment of yarn, the 
weaving operation, extrudability and compatibility between weave and TP or rubber cover. The data will be used to decide on 
full scale hose model system where the hose containing r -PET will be compared to similar hoses with 100% v -PET. At least 
25 m of r-PET based hose will be produced in full-scale production. Perform full scale test at static and dynamic conditions to 
check real usage properties and performances (burst pressure, adhesion, stress-strain fatigue creep, chemical resistance). 
 
Subtask 5.1.3: Manufacture of 20m2 of multicomponent/coated textiles for technical garments (INDITEX) [M29-M33] Coated 
and multilayered fabrics will be  made on proto scale looms and coating lines and tested. The process and final product 
performance are compared to v-PET based products. 
Task 5.2: Pre-industrial-scale: Manufacturing of tyre, hose and clothing and physical performances assessment of the 
3 targeted markets – Duration: [M33-M48] - Leader: MICHELIN - Part.: MANDALS, INDITEX 
Subtask 5.2.1: Manufacture 100 tyres containing r -PET (MICHELIN) [M33-M48] Using second deliveries of higher volume 
of r-PET, semi-industrial evaluations will be launched in MICHELIN. 100 passenger car tyres will be built in industrial shops 
and tested. The industrial feasibility will be evaluated along the whole processing. 
Subtask 5.2.2: Manufacture 1,500 m of lay-flat hoses (MANDALS) [M33-M48] Using second deliveries of higher volume of 
r-PET, semi-industrial evaluations will be launched in MANDALS shops. At least 1,500 m of lay flat hoses will be produced 
by varying weave and hose typed to prepare the introduction at a full scale of r-PET. 
Subtask 5.2.3: Coating of 400 m2 of multilayers textiles and manufacture 4 lines of technical garment (INDITEX) [M33-M48] 
- Using second deliveries of higher volume of r-PET, semi-industrial evaluations will be launched in INDITEX shops. 400 m² 
of coated multi-layered fabrics will be produced by varying weave and coating type to prepare the introduction at a full scale. 
4 lines of technical garments will be manufactured and tested. 
 
WP number 6 Lead beneficiary HVL 
WP title LCA, social-LCA, LCC, Market studies, business modelling and digitisation 
Part. number 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 
Short name of 
part. 
MICHELIN 
CARBIOS 
KORDSA 
ESTATO 
SYNERGIES 
DITF 
IFTH 
AXELERA 
PPRIME 
ERASME 
IRIS 
HVL 
IPOINT 
DYNERGIE 
INDITEX 
PM per part. 9.00 0.20 7.00 3.50 1.00 1.00 1.00  0.25 43.00 2.00 31.00 27.50 3.00 1.00 
Start month M1 End month M48 
Objectives: WP6 combines system thinking methods, sustainability evaluation, and econometrics to develop transferable 
circular economy tools, prototypes, and business models. The overall objective is to progress and anchor concepts for 
sustainable industrial transformation, which foster social inclusion and transparency along with economic sustainability, while 
minimizing adverse impacts on the environment and society. The result is a demonstration on how to develop indicators for 
SDG reporting at corporate level. The use cases that are explored technically in WHITECYCLE (WP2 -WP5), are thereby 
CL6 -2021 -CIRCBIO -01 -04  CONFIDENTIAL  WHITECYCLE  
PART B  40 
enlarged with a comprehensive sustainability assessment. Generic components of these specific investigations are identified 
and assessed for their blueprint potential in related industries. 
Task 6.1: Stock-taking of data to prepare the evaluation of social, economic and environment dimensions  – Duration: 
[M1-M36] - Leader: HVL - Part.: ERASME, MICHELIN, IPOINT 
The usefulness of evaluation results rests upon data availability and data quality. This task ensures that all partners have a joint 
understanding about data needs, data coverage, potential data gaps, and data quality. Starting with a survey to WP6 task leaders, 
T6.1 identifies input requirements and user ri ghts for the chosen methods of T6.2 -6.5. Building on this information, metadata 
schemes are developed, linking to the project’s FAIR DIP (WP 0), international reporting standards, and developing a joint 
ontology across WP6 tasks. The final part of T6.1 is d edicated to developing standards for transparent reporting of data and 
results. This covers the tracking of the provenance of data and checkpoints for the transparent communication of WP results 
within the project and beyond (in compliance with GDPR and IP R). A first delivery will be done to WP0 by M5 for inclusion 
in the DMP by M6.  A final version will be provided by M36 for inclusion in the final DMP. 
Task 6.2: Assessment of environmental dimension (Life -Cycle Assessment) – Duration: [M1-M48] - Leader: IPOINT - 
Part.: ALL 
This task performs a comprehensive environmental life cycle assessment (LCA) of the WHITECYCLE solutions and compares 
them with conventional alternatives, accounting for the complexity of the materials (incl. potential recyclability of end -of-life 
components) and criteria for technical performance (e.g., impact on the durability of materials). The LCA follows a cradle -to-
gate framework and will focus on the following environmental impact categories: GHG emissions (carbon footprint, in 
particular biogenic carbon), primary energy demand (energy footprint), water use and consumption (water footprint), land use, 
as well as impacts on human health and biodiversity. Results will be used in an iterative approach along the project to i) guide 
the development of the investigated value chains towards more sustainable solutions, ii) quantify the potential benefits of t he 
WHITECYCLE solution compared  to alternative technologies (baseline), and iii) help future suppliers and customers make 
more informed decisions. 
Task 6.3: Assessment of economic dimension (Life Cycle Cost, market’s structure, Circular business models) – Duration: 
[M1 - M48] - Leader: ERASME, IPOINT, - Part.: ALL 
This task analyzes causal relationships between cost-benefit analysis, market structures, and firm-level economic performance 
to support circular economy Framework oriented innovation (Blomsma & al., 2019). We start with an  R-framework (4R to 10 
R, Kirrchherr & al., 2017) to map the existing and proposed Circular Economy strategies and to foresee how they influence the 
viability of value chains for the WHITECYCLE innovation cycle . Next, we cross the economic analysis with the analysis at 
three spatial scales (micro, meso and macro) to elicit generic interactions. Thirdly, we develop economic indicators (such as  
variables providing relevant information for decision making, company-level reporting of SDGs), differentiating between end-
product production (economic efficiency), consumption, waste management and production of secondary raw materials (EC, 
2015), and by adjusting them to the different properties of innovation process (Input to T.6.5). A focus on creating value for the 
different actors in the value chain will be designed to ensure acceptance of the circular technologies by the full value chain. Life 
Cycle Costing (LCC) and economic analysis of selected WHITECYCLE processes will be carried out. Overall costs of the 
process related to the production, use and end-of-use will be assessed. 
Task 6.4: Assessment of social dimension (Societal impacts and social acceptance) - Duration: [M13-M36] - Leader: 
ERASME - Part.: HVL – Part.: ALL 
This task assesses social impacts of WHITECYCLE innovations and potential issues for social acceptance. We de fine social 
aspects as all parameters, indicators or issues related to the social relations between individuals and between individuals a nd 
society (Diemer, 2019), and we apply social aspect classifications established in the Social Life Cycle Assessment ( SLCA) 
methodology (Jorgensen & al. (2008), Dempsey & al. (2011) and Ellen McArthur Foundation (2015). WHITECYCLE use cases 
are investigated in the light of SLCA indicators and Sustainable Development Goals. The analysis is informed by the following 
empirical methods: At micro-level, we establish focus groups and communication channels within the MICHELIN, MANDALS 
and INDITEX companies to analyse the degree of social acceptance and diffusion of innovation. At a meso - and macro-level, 
we identify key stakehol ders through an influence -interest matrix, eliciting stakeholder insights through semi -structured 
interviews and participatory scenario building exercises with the aim of creating value for citizens and consumers. As an input 
to T.6.5, the task contributes with suggestions for indicators of the social dimension. 
Task 6.5: Stock-taking of assessment results (Impacts Cross-Matrix of Complex System) - Duration: [M1-M48] - Leader: 
ERASME - HVL - Part.: HVL, IPOINT 
It integrates the results from environmental, social, and economic evaluations and maps the interactions between flows and 
stakeholders. Systems thinking and system dynamics modelling are used to identify systemic behaviour patterns, leverage points 
of intervention (Nedelciu, Diemer, 20 20) and to develop company -level SDG reporting. Moreover, a systemic analysis of 
different circular business models (Diemer, 2020) is launched to lay open potential controversy between technological 
centralization of global chains and territorial de-centralization priorities.  
Task 6.6: Development of an online IS platform enabling an automatic calculation of a feedstock’s environmental impact and 
its compatibility on CARBIOS recycling process – Duration: [M1-M48] - Leader: MICHELIN - Part.: IRIS, SYNERGIES 
Development of an IS solution able to automatically give a feedstock an environmental score based on LCA calculation made 
by IPOINT and the ability to be used on the CARBIOS process. The algorithm will directly use the data from the IRIS’ online 
characterization system and will generate an environmental score according to its compatibility with CARBIOS recycling 
process. The IS system will be connected to the RECYCLE platform (from Refashion) which already makes the inventory of 
different recycled feedstock and recycling solutions available. This task is about: developing the algorithm and release a stable 
CL6 -2021 -CIRCBIO -01 -04  CONFIDENTIAL  WHITECYCLE  
PART B  41 
and user -friendly solution on RECYCLE platform. The solution will be able to environmentally evaluate a recycled PET 
feedstock and make the data available for the customer. 
 
WP number 7 Lead beneficiary AXELERA 
WP title Dissemination, Communication, Strategic Intelligence, Outreach and Replication 
Part. number 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 
Short name of 
part. 
MICHELIN 
CARBIOS 
KORDSA 
ESTATO 
SYNERGIES 
DITF 
IFTH 
AXELERA 
PPRIME 
ERASME 
IRIS 
HVL 
IPOINT 
DYNERGIE 
INDITEX 
PM per part. 4.00 0.50 9.00 6.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 11.00 1.00 4.00 5.00 2.00 2.00 3.00 3.00 
Start month M1 End month M48 
Objectives: The objectives of this WP7 are: 
• To engage targeted early adopters: 3 PET manufacturers, 3 waste managers / recycling equipment manufacturers 
and 12 brand owners 
• To promote WHITECYCLE process design kits for the construction of industrial -scale sorting and recycling 
plants  
• To promote project objec tives, events, opportunities, and results via B2B meetings, large -scale events, 
workshops, the project website, the 6-monthly newsletter and social media  
• To gather key strategic information (such as competing technologies, market evolution and overviews) and share 
it with partners in a user-friendly, exploitable format  
• To ensure dissemination to the research and training networks in science / engineering  
• To update and implement the dissemination and exploitation plans and ensure high impacts. 
Task 7.1: Strategic Intelligence bulletins – Duration: [M1-M48] - Leader: AXELERA - Part.: ALL 
AXELERA will gather information and data about competing technologies, complementary initiatives, relevant meetings, 
markets, and interesting potential end -users. AXELERA will convert this information and data into actionable intelligence to 
enrich strategic and managerial decisions. The process of filtering, distilling, and analysing the data will be done by AXELERA 
who will then propose succinct, visual, clear intelligence to the coordinator and other partners to help them make their decisions. 
The resulting intelligence bulletins may be consulted when “on-the-go” via newsletters. The bulletins will be released every 3 
months starting on M6. All partners will participate in this task to provide needs and specifications, to read the bulletins and to 
provide feedback to AXELERA for the improvement of the content, accessibility, and presentation of the bulletins. 
Task 7.2: Identification and engagement of targeted early adopters, end-users, and other stakeholders – Duration: [M1-
M48] - Leader: AXELERA - Part.: ALL 
The WP7 meetings will be open to each partner’s main technical and communications contact(s). The committee will meet once 
every two weeks during M2 and M3 to ensure that communication tools are rapidly put into place. The initial meetings will 
enable AXELERA to gather partners’ specifications regarding the newsletter and intelligence bulletins, the content of initial  
press release, the website, logo, flyer, etc. After M3, the committee will meet regularly during the months before communication 
and dissemination actions are due to provide partners’ needs and to optimize communication efficiency and results. 
 
Subtask 7.2.1 GRPD compliance. To build the contact database for WHITECYCLE, AXELERA and other partners will collect 
personal contact data of stakeholders. AXELERA confirms that all the data we intend to process is relevant and limited to the 
purposes of the research project (in accordance with the ‘data minimization principle’ of the GRPD regulation). The purpose is 
to ensure the dissemination  and broad uptake of the results of the WHITECYCLE project. A description of the technical and 
organizational measures that will be implemented to safeguard the rights and freedoms of the data subjects will be submitted as 
a deliverable by M2 of the project. 
 
Subtask 7.2.2 Dissemination tools . AXELERA will prepare the logo and visual identity of the project as well as the public 
website (by M6). The website will be regularly updated by AXELERA (at least 3-monthly) with relevant, public content from 
the intelligence bulletins, newsletters, project results, upcoming events. A project flyer will be prepared by AXELERA by M6 
in an electronic version. An updated version will be prepared in preparati on for the workshop. AXELERA will prepare and 
circulate to the project mailing list, a 6 -monthly newsletter. All partners will invite contacts to join the project mailing list. At 
the time of each website update and newsletter mailing, AXELERA will push content via social media, including LinkedIn and 
Twitter. Partners will be encouraged to repost this content. Each partner will inform the other partners in advance whenever a 
major publication, a presentation, event, or other milestone is planned linked to WHITECYCLE. For the key communication 
stages of the project, the first and the last press release: the project coordinator will write the text of the press release  with 
support from partners. AXELERA will prepare 3 communication kits during the project (th e first one by M6 and updates at 
M18 and M40). These kits will contain all communication materials available and will be shared on the project’s shared online 
space. AXELERA will also prepare 2 videos in interview format during the project. 
 
CL6 -2021 -CIRCBIO -01 -04  CONFIDENTIAL  WHITECYCLE  
PART B  42 
Subtask 7.2.3 Identifying and engaging stakeholders. Based on partners own networks and intelligence as well as the 6-monthly 
project intelligence bulletins, AXELERA will propose a list of targeted organizations and people to approach and engage. The 
proposed list will be submitted to the consortium for approval before engagement. CARBIOS, ESTATO, IRIS, DITF, 
KORDSA, MICHELIN and SYNERGIES will seek agreements with at least 3 PET manufacturers, 3 waste managers / 
recycling equipment manufacturers and 12 brand owners  whose products contain PET to uptake project technologies by 
promoting the project’s KPIs, meeting with them to understand their resources and needs and ultimately disseminating process 
design kits that meet their needs. (See section 2.2.1.)  
Once agreements have been obtained with these stakeholders, they will continue to deepen relationships with these stakeholders 
to move toward full industrial deployment and market uptake just after the project. AXELERA will organize two workshops 
targeting the participation of 40 to 60 participants. The workshops will serve to strengthen relationships with the broader circle 
of stakeholders, to obtain their needs and feedback, to explain how the results could be useful for the stakeholders, etc.  
To facilitate cooperation with related European projects in the field, with each intelligence bulletin, the list of relevant projects 
will be updated by AXELERA. The coordinators and partners of all these projects will be added to the project mailing list. Each 
project will also be invited to join all public project events. If representatives from other projects attend these events, a dedicated, 
face-to-face “project symbiosis” session will be organized. The WP leaders of all complementary projects will be invited to 
attend 6-monthly “symbiosis” conference calls with WHITECYCLE WP lead ers to discuss common issues and opportunities. 
Dissemination to key stakeholders will whenever relevantly include links to access and reuse exploitable data published during 
the project.  
ERASME partner will also cover dissemination towards the large public (section 2.2.1) by hosting debates, podcasts on circular 
economy. Partners’ policy departments will contribute to policy discussions to support the emerging circular economy. 
Task 7.3: Update of the project diss. plan – Duration: [M15-M48] - Leader: AXELERA - Part.: ALL 
AXELERA will update the project’s dissemination plan for each periodic report and the final report with inputs from all partners. 
These updates will meet the EC requirements. 
Task 7.4: Scientific publications, presentations – Duration: [M6-M48] - Leader: AXELERA - Part.: ALL 
The research institute partners plan to produce 10 major open -access project publications. 3 related “follow -up” publications 
will be prepared as easy -to-understand summaries by AXELERA. These boost the impacts of the major publications among 
non-specialists. AXELERA will obtain approval by the authors of the original publications before submission of the follow-up 
publications to Horizon, the EU Research & Innovation Mag ., partners’ websites, the project website, local news media, trade 
journals. Academic partners will organize conferences to promote their results among the scientific community (section 2.2.1). 
Task 7.5: Training development – Duration: [M1-M48] – Part leader: AXELERA – Part: ALL 
AXELERA will develop links and help build strong partnerships between the WHITECYCLE consortium and training programs 
by twinning with European training centers and networks like C -Planet and CAPTURE (funded European training programs). 
WHITECYCLE will put forward case studies, data, needs concerning future scientists and engineers (section 2.1.4). 
Table 3.1c: List of Deliverables 
Del. 
n° Deliverable name W
P Lead part. Type Diss. 
lvl 
Delivery 
date  
D0.1 Collaborative portal 0 DYNERGIE OTH SEN M3 
D0.2 Minutes of official meetings, set up of corrective action & their follow-up  0 DYNERGIE R SEN Every 
6M 
D0.3 Data Management Plan 0 HVL DMP PU M6/48 
D0.4 WHITECYCLE’s ethics requirements 0 DYNERGIE ETHI
CS PU M3/42 
D0.5 Final Report 0 MICHELIN R SEN M48 
D0.6 IPR activities report 0 DYNERGIE R SEN M48 
D0.7 Blueprint of a FAIR Implementation Protocol use cases (upload to EOSC) 0 HVL R PU M48 
D1.1 Report on LIBS, NIIR and hyperspectral technologies adequacy as 
recognition system of clothing textile waste 1 IRIS R SEN M8 
D1.2 Report on efficiency of other technologies for chemical PET textile 
identification vs. LIBS 1 MICHELIN R SEN M6 
D1.3 TRL5 recognition system 1 IRIS DEM SEN M14 
D1.4 Report on the shaping processes upscale for multilayer clothing textile waste 1 SYNERGIES R SEN M12 
D1.5 Report on the key parameters for the electrostatic sorting of PET from ELT 1 PPRIME R SEN M12 
D1.6 Report on the pilot scale process loop activities 1 SYNERGIES R SEN M14 
D1.7 Design, development, and implementation of a pre-industrial sorting system 
for clothing textile waste feedstock 1 SYNERGIES DEM SEN M24 
D1.8 Design, development, and implementation of a pre-industrial sorting system 
for ELT waste feedstock 1 MICHELIN DEM SEN M36 
D2.1 1 kg of analytical sample (from each feedstock) for depolymerization and 
preliminary purification trials in WP3 2 MICHELIN DEM SEN M12 
D2.2 1 tonne of amorphized PET 2 IFTH DEM SEN M18 
D2.3 Report on upscaling activities of the selected pre-industrial processes 2 MICHELIN R SEN M36 
D2.4 Protocol of characterisation of amorphous/crystalline ratio of 
treated/untreated PET waste 2 IFTH R SEN M32 
D3.1 ELT feedstock: production and characterization of CTA at lab scale from a 
selected sample 3 CARBIOS R SEN M14 
CL6 -2021 -CIRCBIO -01 -04  CONFIDENTIAL  WHITECYCLE  
PART B  43 
D3.2 Clothing waste feedstock: production and characterization of CTA at lab 
scale from a selected sample 3 CARBIOS R SEN M17 
D3.3 Production of 85-100 kg of monomer from ELT feedstock 3 CARBIOS OTH SEN M19 
D3.4 Production of 85-100 kg of monomer from clothing waste feedstock 3 CARBIOS OTH SEN M24 
D3.5 Report on analysis performed on the salt M24 3 CARBIOS R SEN M24 
D3.6 Report on the various opportunities of by -product valorization, comparison 
in term of environmental impact 3 MICHELIN R SEN M48 
D3.7 1-2 t of monomers from high PET content waste 3 CARBIOS OTH SEN M22 
D4.1 Process parameters to achieving IV > 0.95 comparable with commercial PET 
technical grade on lab scale (8 Kg) 4 DITF R SEN M15 
D4.2 160 Kg PET (IV > 0.95 ) and 60 kg PET (IV > 0.65) comparable with 
commercial PET technical grade  4 DITF OTH SEN M22 
D4.3 40 kg of HMLS yarn from commercial PET  4 IFTH OTH SEN M18 
D4.4 50 kg of r-PET HMLS yarn for tyre application  4 IFTH OTH SEN M23 
D4.5 25 kg of r-PET HMLS yarn for hoses and 40 kg of textile grade for clothing 4 IFTH OTH SEN M27 
D4.6 200 kg of r-PET textile grade for clothing textile 4 INDITEX OTH SEN M30 
D4.7 20 kg of twisted HMLS yarn from HMLS yarn with commercial PET  4 KORDSA OTH SEN M21 
D4.8 40 kg of r-PET HMLS single end cord for tyre application  4 KORDSA OTH SEN M25 
D4.9 20 kg of r-PET HMLS twisted yarn for hoses application & 910 kg of r-PET 
HMLS yarn for tyre and hoses application 4 KORDSA OTH SEN M30 
D4.10 600 kg of r-PET HMLS tyre-cord baby roll  4 KORDSA OTH SEN M34 
D5.1 Tyre demo of r-PET with at least the same performance as ref. 5 MICHELIN DEM SEN M33 
D5.2 Hose demo of r-PET with at least the same performance as ref. 5 MANDALS DEM SEN M33 
D5.3 Clothing demo of r-PET with at least the same performance as ref. 5 INDITEX DEM SEN M33 
D5.4 r-PET tyre scale-up validation with at least the same performance as ref. 5 MICHELIN DEM SEN M48 
D5.5 r-PET hose scale-up validation with at least the same performance as ref. 5 MANDALS DEM SEN M48 
D5.6 r-PET clothing scale-up validation with at least the same performance as ref. 5 INDITEX DEM SEN M48 
D6.1 
Update of the project data inventory with WP6 data (input to the FAIR DIP) 
/ WP6 metadata schema and ontological agreement / WP6 data transparency 
and communication checkpoints 
6 HVL DATA SEN M12/24/
30 
D6.2 Screening LCA for hotspots identification of environmental 
impacts/Comprehensive LCA report 6 IPOINT R SEN M12/24/
48 
D6.3 Life Cost Cycle - Market Analysis 6 IPOINT R SEN M18 
D6.4 SWOT Matrix Impact - Circular Economy R Framework Report 6 ERASME R SEN M24 
D6.5 Circular Business Models Typology 6 ERASME R SEN M42 
D6.6 Social Life Cycle Assessment Methodology / Report on Social Impacts - 
Social Acceptance Process / Social Acceptance Survey’s Analysis 6 ERASME R SEN M24/36/
42 
D6.7 System Dynamic Model (loops’ design) / Stakeholders Mapping - 
Participatory System Dynamics Modelling / Company Level SDGs Report 6 ERASME R SEN M24/36/
44 
D6.8 Information system solution for feedstock environmental impact + recycling 
process compatibility assessment up and ready  6 MICHELIN OTHE
R SEN M48 
D7.1 GRPD compliance report  7 AXELERA R PU M2 
D7.2 Dissemination, exploitation and communication plan 7 AXELERA DEC PU M6 
D7.3 Summary of main benefits provided by WHITECYCLE’s strategic 
intelligence reports  7 AXELERA DEC PU M24 
D7.4 Summary of Follow-up publications  7 AXELERA DEC PU M48 
D7.5 Workshops 7 AXELERA DEC PU M48 
Table 3.1d: List of milestones 
MS # Milestone name WP Due date Means of verification 
MS0.1 Pre-financing distributed 0 M1 Payments are received by the partners 
MS1.1 Separation of 500kg of PET from complex textile clothing 1 M14 
500 kg of high PET containing textile material 
extracted from clothing waste and 
characterized 
MS1.2 Separation of 800kg of PET from composite wastes (ELT, 
hoses, textiles) 1 M14 800 kg of high PET containing fibrous 
material extracted from ELT and characterized 
MS1.3 Separation of 1 tonne of PET from ELT wastes  1 M36 1 tonne of high PET containing fibrous 
material extracted from ELT and characterized 
MS2.1 Impact of PET waste pollutant on 
amorphization/purification is characterized and understood 2 M18 Impact assessment report on the pollutants 
D2.1 
MS2.2 The amorphization process is compatible with the enzymatic 
depolymerization 2 M24 D2.4 report 
MS3.1 ELT feedstock: Validation of 75% depolymerisation at lab 
scale for ELT feedstock 3 M12 Characterization results exhibits at least a 75 
% depolymerisation level for ELT 
MS3.2 Clothing waste feedstock: Validation of 80% 
depolymerisation at lab scale for clothing waste feedstock 3 M15 
Characterization results exhibits at least a 80 
% depolymerisation level for clothing textile 
waste 
CL6 -2021 -CIRCBIO -01 -04  CONFIDENTIAL  WHITECYCLE  
PART B  44 
MS3.3 Report on the characterization of the various by -products 
from the different streams 3 M48 
Characterization results exhibiting best by -
product recycl ing options along value chain.  
Analysis of their implementation potential. 
MS4.1 
Enough information has been gathered to prove feasibility to 
produce twisted multifilament HMLS yarn with suitable 
specifications for hoses application at pre -industrial scale 
line 
4 M28 D4.5 
MS4.2 
Enough information has been gathered to prove feasibility to 
produce multifilament HT yarn with suitable specifications 
for hoses application at pre-industrial scale line 
4 M30 D4.9 
MS4.3 
Enough information has been gathered to prove feasibility to 
produce multifilament HMLS single end cord with suit able 
specifications for tyre application at pre-industrial scale line 
4 M30 D4.10 
MS5.2 
The physical and chemical properties of r -PET are suitable 
at pilot scale to launch industrial production of tyres, lay-flat 
hoses, and garments 
5 M33 
Characterization results on the physical and 
chemical properties of r -PET compared to v -
PET.  
MS5.3 
The physical and chemical properties of r -PET are suitable 
at industrial production scale for tyres, lay -flat hoses, and 
garments 
5 M43 
Upscale validation results on the physical and 
chemical properties of r -PET compared to v -
PET. D5.4 D5.5 D5.6 
MS7.1 Project workshop held 7 M42 Minutes, documentation, photos 
Table 3.1e: Critical risks for implementation 
Description of risk (indicate level of (i) likelihood 
LL, and (ii) severity S: Low/Medium/High) 
W
P Contingency & Mitigation measures 
Clothing textile waste id. technology not efficient 
enough to identify PET from multilayered  feedstocks 
due to PET being in intermediate layers MS 1.1 - LL: 
Medium / S: High 
1 
A combination of back -up optical methods for id. of chemical 
composition of clothing textile waste feedstock will be tested 
and implemented in WP1 as contingencies (terahertz etc.) 
Processes and technologies for sorting of the PET 
fraction from ELT not efficient enough to provide high 
PET content (>80%) MS 1.2/1.3 - LL: Medium / S: 
Medium 
1 
Extension of the period regarding the piloting activities to find 
the best process parameters to reach the best purity level – mix 
with higher PET content waste for subsequent work 
Processes and technologies implemented for 
amorphization of the PET not efficient enough to reach 
less than 15% crystallinity for the PET MS 2.1 - LL: 
Medium / S: Medium 
2 
Further preliminary studies will be conducted to find a set of 
process parameters that enables IFTH to reach <15% 
crystallinity. Sorting improvement. 
Enzymatic depolymerization not efficient enough MS 
3.1 - LL: Medium / S: Medium 3 Pre-treatment improvement, enzyme optimization, tyre, and 
textile eco-design to facilitate depolymerisation step 
Difficulties in monomer purification to achieve high 
quality required with an acceptable environmental and 
economic impact MS 3.2 - LL: High / S: Medium 
3 
Pre-treatment improvement to remove most of impurities before 
depolymerization, tyre and textile eco -design, dilution of 
complex waste by adding simpler waste containing more PET to 
dilute impurities  
The contaminants may make polymerisation and high -
speed multifilament spinning processability difficult 
and cause some broken filament formation MS 4.1 - LL: 
High / S: Medium 
4 
Blending the SSP-ed r-PET flakes with virgin monomer -based 
PET at different proportions will be the main strategy for 
developing the uniformity of SSP -ed PET during high -speed 
melt spinning. 
r-PET based tyres may not exhibit good enough 
performances to pass requirements to 
commercialization D 5.3 - LL: Medium / S: High 
5 Adapt design tyre scope or use d ifferent mixes of r-PET/v-PET 
in the pilot tyres to reach the required performances 
Overall LCA results for the whole value chain may not 
exhibit expected CO 2 reductions and/or energy 
efficiency D6.2 - LL: Low / S: High 
6 
Adapt the overall concept to reduce the CO2 emission by 
including the long -term impacts of by -product recycling 
management  
Inadequate commitment by partners in the value chain 
(e.g., brand -owners, waste managers…) D7.2 - LL: 
Low / S: High 
7 
Discussions to be held with at least 18 companies in the first half 
of the project. I n M42 when the opportunity leaflet , process 
design kits  and LCC/LCA KPIs are confirmed , a dditional 
companies will be approached to garner their interest to adopt 
project results. 
 
  
CL6 -2021 -CIRCBIO -01 -04  CONFIDENTIAL  WHITECYCLE  
PART B  45 
Table 3.1f: Summary of staff effort 
Partner WP0 WP1 WP2 WP3 WP4 WP5 WP6 WP7 Total PM 
MICHELIN (incl. MANDALS) 24.00 35.00 36.00 4.00 2.00 27.00 9.00 4.00 140.00 
CARBIOS 6.00  0.10 55.00 0.10  0.20 0.50 61.90 
KORDSA     59.00  7.00 9.00 77.00 
ESTATO 3.00 17.50     3.50 6.00 30.00 
SYNERGIES 8.00 36.00     1.00 1.00 46.00 
DITF 2.00    31.00  1.00 1.00 35.00 
IFTH 2.00  36.00 0.50 23.00  1.00 1.00 63.50 
AXELERA 4.60       16.10 20.70 
PPRIME (incl. UNIV. POITIERS) 0.45 37.15 3.65    0.25 1.00 42.50 
ERASME 1.00      43.00 4.00 48.00 
IRIS 3.00 60.00     2.00 5.00 70.00 
HVL 5.00      31.00 2.00 38.00 
IPOINT 3.00      27.50 2.00 32.50 
DYNERGIE 20.00      3 3 26.00 
INDITEX 3.00     5.00 18.00 1.00 30.00 
TOTAL 86.05 185.65 75.75 59.50 120.10 45.00 130.45 53.50 761.10 
Table 3.1g: ‘Subcontracting costs’ items 
 
Table 3.1h: ‘Purchase costs’ items (travel and subsistence, equipment and other goods, works and services)’ 
 
Table 3.1i: ‘Other costs categories’ items (e.g., internally invoiced goods and services) – not applicable 
Table 3.1j: ‘In-kind contributions’ provided by third parties – not applicable 

This proposal version was submitted by Mathieu Raoutier on 06/10/2021 15:40:51 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 
 
Commission européenne/Europese Commissie, 1049 Bruxelles/Brussel, BELGIQUE/BELGIË - Tel. +32 22991111 
 
 
  
 
This electronic receipt is a digitally signed version of the document submitted by your 
organisation. Both the content of the document and a set of metadata have been digitally 
sealed. 
This digital signature mechanism, using a public -private key pair mechanism, uniquely 
binds this eReceipt to the modules of the Funding & Tenders Portal of the European 
Commission, to the transaction for which it was generated and ensures its full integr ity. 
Therefore a complete digitally signed trail of the transaction is available both for your 
organisation and for the issuer of the eReceipt. 
Any attempt to modify the content will lead to a break of the integrity of the electronic 
signature, which can b e verified at any time by clicking on the eReceipt validation 
symbol. 
More info about eReceipts can be found in the FAQ page of the Funding & Tenders 
Portal.  
(https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/portal/screen/support/faq)