4. Personal Data Page
Does this activity involve processing of personal data? Yes No 41
Does it involve the processing of special categories of personal data  (e.g.: genetic, 
biometric and health data, sexual lifestyle, ethnicity, political opinion, religious or 
philosophical beliefs)?
Yes No
Does it involve profiling, systematic monitoring of individuals, or processing of large 
scale of special categories of data or intrusive methods of data processing (such as, 
surveillance, geolocation tracking etc.)?
Yes No
Does this activity involve further processing of previously collected personal data (including 
use of preexisting data sets or sources, merging existing data sets)?
Yes No 41
Is it planned to export personal data from the EU to non-EU countries? Specify the type of 
personal data and countries involved
Yes No
Is it planned to import personal data from non-EU countries into the EU or from a non-EU 
country to another non-EU country? Specify the type of personal data and countries involved
Yes No
Does this activity involve the processing of personal data related to criminal convictions or 
offences?
Yes No
5. Animals Page
Does this activity involve animals? Yes No
6. Non-EU Countries Page
Will some of the activities be carried out in non-EU countries? Yes No 37
KORDSA is a large industrial company based in Turkey. KORDSA will be in charge of transforming the recycled PET monomers 
through different industrial processes in order to obtain cords for the production of tyres and yarns for the production of lay-flat 
hoses. These materials are not hazardous and non toxic. They are not critical materials. 
In case non-UE countries are involved, do the activities undertaken in these countries raise 
potential ethics issues? Yes No
Administrative forms
Page 132 of 136
Proposal ID 101059639
Acronym WHITECYCLE
Horizon Europe ver 1.00 20210928 Last saved 07/10/2021 09:09
It is planned to use local resources (e.g. animal and/or human tissue samples, genetic material, 
live animals, human remains, materials of historical value, endangered fauna or flora samples,
etc.)? 
Yes No
Is it planned to import any material (other than data) from non-EU countries into the EU or 
from a non-EU country to another non-EU country? For data imports, see section 4. Yes No 37
During the pilot-scale loop,  KORDSA (TURKEY) will send 25kg of cords to MANDALS (NORWAY) and 50kg cords to MICHELIN 
(FRANCE). 
During the pre-industrial loop, KORDSA (TURKEY) will send 250kg to MANDALS (NORWAY) and 700kg of cords to MICHELIN (FRANCE). 
 
Specific attention will be paid to the materials being sent cross-border and proper documentations will be provided to the relevant 
authorities in order to fully respect the Turkish and the EU laws regarding transit of merchandises. 
These materials are not hazardous and non toxic. They are not critical materials.  
Is it planned to export any material (other than data) from the EU to non-EU countries? For 
data exports, see section 4. Yes No 37
During the pilot-scale loop, 90kg of yarns will be sent from IFTH (FRANCE) to KORDSA (TURKEY). 
During the pre-industrial loop, 1300kg of polymer will be sent from TECHNIP ZIMMER - subcontractor (GERMANY) to KORDSA 
(TURKEY). 
 
Specific attention will be paid to the materials being sent cross-border and proper documentations will be provided to the the 
relevant authorities in order to fully respect the Turkish and the EU laws regarding transit of merchandises. 
These materials are not hazardous and non toxic. They are not critical materials. 
Does this activity involve low and/or lower middle income countries, (if yes, detail the benefit-
sharing actions planned in the self-assessment) Yes No
Could the situation in the country put the individuals taking part in the activity at risk? Yes No
7. Environment, Health and Safety Page
Does this activity involve the use of substances or processes that may cause harm to the 
environment, to animals or plants.(during the implementation of the activity or further to the 
use of the results, as a possible impact) ?
Yes No
Does this activity deal with endangered fauna and/or flora / protected areas? Yes No
Does this activity involve the use of substances or processes that may cause harm to humans, 
including  those performing the activity.(during the implementation of the activity or further 
to the use of the results, as a possible impact) ?
Yes No
8. Artificial Intelligence Page
Does this activity involve the development, deployment and/or use of Artificial Intelligence? (if 
yes, detail in the self-assessment whether that could raise ethical concerns related to human 
rights and values and detail how this will be addressed).
Yes No 19
9. Other Ethics Issues Page
Are there any other ethics issues that should be taken into consideration? Yes No
I confirm that I have taken into account all ethics issues above and that, if any ethics issues apply, I will complete the 
ethics self-assessment as described in the guidelines How to Complete your Ethics Self-Assessment
Administrative forms
Page 133 of 136
Proposal ID 101059639
Acronym WHITECYCLE
Horizon Europe ver 1.00 20210928 Last saved 07/10/2021 09:09
Ethics Self-Assessment
Ethical dimension of the objectives, methodology and likely impact
Our project involves the import/export of materials with Turkey, i.e., a non-EU country.  
However these imports and exports are technical materials that are being transformed in Turkey by KORDSA in order to manufacture 
end-products. These materials are quite similar to currently commercialized products and, not in any way, possibly problematic 
materials such as animal and/or human tissue samples, genetic material, live animals, human remains, materials of historical value, 
endangered fauna or flora samples, fossils, etc. 
These exchanges are intended to reinforce the links between stakeholders of the value chain and accelerate the dissemination of 
circular economy principles. 
Consequently, we do not consider there is any issue for the import/export of such materials with Turkey. 
On top of this, these merchandises exchanges will be fully respecting the Turkish and the EU laws regarding custom border controls 
etc. 
The project serve to solve a persistent problem in Europe with the highest ecological and social standards.
Remaining characters 3968
Compliance with ethical principles and relevant legislations
MICHELIN as project coordinator will lead and assess the execution of the ethical requirements within the project in accordance with 
applicable national, European and international legislation. Ethical standards and guidelines will be rigorously applied, irrespective of 
the country in which the research is carried out. 
 
 
 
The project will ensure that all beneficiaries/partners will follow EU and national regulations regarding data protection and will 
obtain approval from local/national authority in charge of data protection, if applicable. Indeed, all ethical issues that this project may 
be exposed will be handled by the affected partners and in accordance with the applicable legislation. The work of the project will be 
subject to the following ethical-related directives and regulations: 
 
• The Charter of Fundamental Rights of the EU (2000/c 364/01) 
 
• Directive 95/46/EC of 24 October 1995 on the protection of individuals with regards to the processing of personal data and the free 
movement of such data 
 
• REGULATION (EU) 2016/679 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 27 April 2016 on the protection of natural 
persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC 
(General Data Protection Regulation) 
 
  
 
KORDSA (TURKEY) is a key supplier for MICHELIN and thus has been evaluated by EcoVadis, the world's most trusted business 
sustainability ratings. KORDSA has been ranked in the first quarter of the rankings of the companies evaluated by EcoVadis with an 
overall score of 67/100 whereas the average industry score is 46/100. Specific attention will be paid to the materials being sent cross-
border and proper documentations will be provided to the the relevant authorities in order to fully respect the Turkish and the EU 
laws regarding merchandises in transit. 
 
  
 
Partners will be compliant with the General  Data  Protection  Regulation  (GDPR)  during their collection of personal data during 
 
communication, dissemination and network-building activities. Partners have appointed Data Protection Officers (DPO), and the 
contact details of the DPOs of Michelin and Axelera will be made available to the Commission and all data subjects involved in the 
project.  Partners confirm that all of the data we intend to process is relevant and limited to the purposes of the research project (in 
Administrative forms
Page 134 of 136
Proposal ID 101059639
Acronym WHITECYCLE
Horizon Europe ver 1.00 20210928 Last saved 07/10/2021 09:09
accordance with the ‘data minimisation principle’). The purpose is to ensure the dissemination and broad uptake of the results of the 
project. The personal data will be limited to: 
 
• Name (mandatory) 
 
• Organisation (mandatory) 
 
• Title (mandatory) 
 
• Email address (mandatory) 
 
• Telephone number (optional) 
 
A description of the technical and organisational measures that will be implemented to safeguard the rights and freedoms of the 
data subjects will be submitted as a deliverable by Month 2 of the project (D7.1  –  GDPR  compliance  report).  For  further  
processing  of  previously  collected  personal  data,  an explicit confirmation that Axelera and other partners have lawful basis for the 
data processing and that the  appropriate  technical  and  organisational  measures  are  in  place  to  safeguard  the  rights  of  the  
data subjects will be included in this deliverable. This will include the above-listed contact data provided to us by project partners for 
potential inclusion in the mailing list for dissemination activities. Detailed information on the informed consent procedures in regard 
to data processing will be kept 
on file by Axelera. 
 
  
 
Regarding Artificial Intelligence, the developed technologies will not replace existing or future jobs, because it enables sorting on 
mixtures that humans cannot manually sort. The AI sorting technology will not harm and will improve  Human agency and oversight 
(decision-support tools enabling circular waste management), Technical robustness and safety (new processes enabled), Privacy and 
data governance (data will be generated which it was not previously possible to have), Transparency (the tool will enable 
stakeholders to know what percentage of materials they have and what percentage of materials is recycled), Diversity, non-
discrimination and fairness (the tool will help increase fairness between actors dealing with secondary raw materials (currently 
"waste") and actors dealing with primary raw materials, Societal and environmental wellbeing (job creation, less GHG emissions, less 
landfilling, and Accountability (enabling polluter pays principles to be further applied for companies that produce consumer 
products and allowing accountability of secondary raw materials suppliers to confirm the amount of recycled material content).
Remaining characters 280
Administrative forms
Page 135 of 136
Proposal ID 101059639
Acronym WHITECYCLE
Horizon Europe ver 1.00 20210928 Last saved 07/10/2021 09:09
Security issues table
1. EU Classified Information (EUCI)2 Page
Does this activity involve information and/or materials requiring protection against 
unauthorised disclosure (EUCI)? Yes No
Does this activity involve non-EU countries? Yes No
2. Misuse Page
Does this activity have the potential for misuse of results? Yes No
3. Other Security Issues Page
Does this activity involve information and/or materials subject to national security restrictions? 
If yes, please specify: (Maximum number of characters allowed: 1000)
Yes No
Are there any other security issues that should be taken into consideration? 
If yes, please specify: (Maximum number of characters allowed: 1000)
Yes No
2According to the Commission Decision (EU, Euratom) 2015/444 of 13 March 2015 on the security rules for protecting EU classified information, “European Union 
classified information (EUCI) means any information or material designated by an EU security classification, the unauthorised disclosure of which could cause varying 
degrees of prejudice to the interests of the European Union or of one or more of the Member States”. 
3Classified background information is information that is already classified by a country and/or international organisation and/or the EU and is going to be used by the 
project. In this case, the project must have in advance the authorisation from the originator of the classified information, which is the entity (EU institution, EU Member 
State, third state or international organisation) under whose authority the classified information has been generated. 
4EU classified foreground information is information (documents/deliverables/materials) planned to be generated by the project and that needs to be protected from 
unauthorised disclosure. The originator of the EUCI generated by the project is the European Commission.
Administrative forms
Page 136 of 136
Proposal ID 101059639
Acronym WHITECYCLE
Horizon Europe ver 1.00 20210928 Last saved 07/10/2021 09:09
5 - Other questions
Two-stage calls
The full stage-2 proposal must be consistent with the short outline proposal submitted the to stage 1 - in particular with respect to the 
proposal characteristics addressing the concepts of excellence and impact
Are there substantial differences compared to the stage-1 proposal? Yes No
Essential information to be provided for proposals including clinical Trials / studies / investigations
Clinical study means, for the purpose of this document, any systematic prospective or retrospective collection and analysis of health data obtained 
from individual patients or healthy persons in order to address scientific questions related to the understanding, prevention, diagnosis, monitoring or 
treatment of a disease, mental illness, or physical condition. It includes but it is not limited to clinical studies as defined by Regulation 536/2014 (on 
medicinal products), clinical investigation and clinical evaluation as defined by Regulation 2017/745  (on medical devices), performance study and 
performance evaluation as defined by Regulation 2017/746 (on in vitro diagnostic medical devices).
Are clinical studies / trials / investigations included in the work plan of this project? Yes No
CL6 -2021 -CIRCBIO -01 -04  CONFIDENTIAL  WHITECYCLE  
 1 
LARGE-SCALE CIRCULARITY OF PET VIA SMART SORTING, ENZYMATIC 
RECYCLING OF COMPLEX WASTE - 
CIRCULAR PRODUCTION OF 3 HIGH-SPECIFICATION PET-CONTAINING 
PRODUCTS: TYRES, MULTI-MATERIAL CLOTHING AND HOSES 
- 
WHITECYCLE - WHITE TECHNOLOGY TEXTILE CYCLE 
 
 
 
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS 
Part. No. Participant organisation name Short name Country 
1(Coord.) 
2 
MANUFACTURE FRANÇAISE DES PNEUMATIQUES MICHELIN 
(WITH LINKED THIRD PARTY: FENNER MANDALS AS) 
MICHELIN 
MANDALS 
FR 
NO 
3 CARBIOS SA CARBIOS FR 
4 KORDSA TEKNIK TEKSTIL ANONIM SIRKETI KORDSA TR 
5 ESTATO UMWELTSERVICE GMBH ESTATO DE 
6 TLC SYNERGIES  SYNERGIES FR 
7 DEUTSCHE INSTITUTE FÜR TEXTIL – UND FASERFORSCHUNG 
DENKENDORF DITF DE 
8 INSTITUT FRANÇAIS DU TEXTILE ET DE L’HABILLEMENT IFTH FR 
9 AXELERA  AXELERA FR 
10 
11 
CENTRE NATIONAL DE LA RECHERCHE SCIENTIFIQUE CNRS 
INSTITUT PPRIME 
(WITH LINKED THIRD PARTY: UNIVERSITE DE POITIERS) 
PPRIME FR 
FR 
12 ERASME (CENTRE D'EXCELLENCE JEAN MONNET SUR LE 
DEVELOPPEMENT DURABLE) ERASME FR 
13 IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS SOCIEDAD LIMITADA IRIS SP 
14 HOGSKULEN PA VESTLANDET HVL NO 
15 IPOINT IPOINT DE 
16 DYNERGIE DYNERGIE FR 
17 INDUSTRIA DE DISENO TEXTIL SA INDITEX SP 
 
CALL & PROJECT INFORMATION 
Type of action: Innovation action (IA) 
Duration of the project: 48 Months 
Deadline: 06 October 2021 
 
COORDINATING PERSON DETAILS 
Name  Michael Cogne 
Organisation MANUFACTURE FRANÇAISE DES PNEUMATIQUES MICHELIN (MICHELIN) 
Email michael.cogne@michelin.com 
 

CL6 -2021 -CIRCBIO -01 -04  CONFIDENTIAL  WHITECYCLE  
PART B  2 
TABLE OF CONTENT 
1 EXCELLENCE ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ............... 3