=== Domain B: photonic sensors for pharmaceutical inline process analytical technology (PAT) ===
=== Section 3_3: Consortium as a whole ===

1.2.2. The Consortium as a whole The Consortium will be composed of 9 partners from 5 countries in Europe, having the following roles: 1. IRIS Technology Solutions (IRIS) 2. Instituto de Óptica “Daza de Valdés” (IO-CSIC) 3. Instituto de Ciencias de Materiales de Sevilla (ICMS-CSIC) 4. Centre for Research in Nanomaterials and Nanotechnology (CINN) 5. University of Barcelona (UB) 6. Barcelona Supercomputing Center (BSC) 7. Tecnalia (TECNALIA) 8. University of Technology of Compiègne (UTC) 9. Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) 10. KET4Clean Production (KET4CP) KET4Clean Production is a SME that will facilitate the dissemination and exploitation of the developed technology. It is a European initiative providing a “one-stop shop” access to a network of more than 70 European pilot plants for process industry sectors, including Pharma and Biotech. KET4CP will be the link between the project and the end-users involved in the initiative. 2.1. Vision and Objectives 2.1.1. Vision and Objectives The project objectives are: Objective 1: To develop a sensor based on photonic crystals operating in the IR range, able to identify the presence of chemical compounds in the Pharma and Biotech industry. Objective 2: To achieve a sensor with improved sensitivity, monitoring and control of processes in the Biotech and Pharma industry. To achieve this objective the sensor must have a sensitivity 5 times higher than the currently available on the market. Objective 3: To develop an online system (hardware + software) for the monitoring and control of industrial processes in the Pharma and Biotech industry. Objective 4: To validate the system in a real environment in two different scenarios. Objective 5: To transfer the knowledge and technology achieved in the project to the end-users (pilot plants). 2.1.2. Concept and methodology Within this project, we propose to develop an innovative photonic crystal based on the IR spectral range. In order to increase the sensitivity of the sensor, we will be able to modify the characteristics of the photonic crystal to maximize the interaction with the chemical compounds. Our approach will be inspired in biological systems, and we will be able to modify the surface of the photonic crystals to attach specific molecules to interact with the target chemical compounds, increasing the sensitivity of the sensor. The interaction of the light with the chemical compounds will be detected by a photodetector (PD) that will be directly integrated on the device. The PD will be based in an innovative photodetector with a much higher sensitivity than the commercially available, increasing the sensing capabilities of the sensor. The data will be acquired by specialized electronics, that will be also embedded in a wireless sensor node. The wireless sensor node will be the interface between the sensor and the final user. The user will be able to receive the data in a mobile device or PC, and analyze it in real time. The analysis will be made through an AI algorithm able to detect the presence of the chemical compounds. The algorithm will be trained with a huge amount of data, using the supercomputing infrastructures available in Spain. The Project´s concept is summarized in Figure 1.2.2-1. Figure 1.2.2-1 Project´s concept. 2.2. Implementation 2.2.1. Work plan — Work packages, deliverables and milestones The project will be developed through 8 work packages (WP), which tasks are summarized in Table 1.2.2-1. Table 1.2.2-1 Project Tasks. Work Package (WP) WP1 Project Management and Dissemination WP2 Sensor development and high sensitivity WP3 Data analysis system WP4 System implementation WP5 Validation of the system WP6 Exploitation of the results WP7 Ethical and gender issues WP8 Gender balance and Equal Opportunities WP9 Future training and education (optional) WP10 Business Plan (optional) The specific objectives, the activities and the deliverables along the development of the project are summarized as follows: 2.2.1.1. WP1 — Project management and dissemination Objective: The general objective of this WP is to monitor and control the project progress, ensuring the compliance of the project deadlines, to generate the necessary documentation to disseminate the project results and to manage the exploitation of the results in the best way. Tasks: 1. To comply with the administrative and financial procedures required by the European Commission. 2. To coordinate the project activities, monitor the progress and the achieved results. 3. To ensure the achievement of the project objectives. 4. To generate the necessary documentation for the dissemination of the project results. 