=== Domain B: photonic sensors for pharmaceutical inline process analytical technology (PAT) ===
=== Section 1_1: Objectives and ambition ===

1 1.1 Objectives and ambition 1.1.1 Objectives The overall objective of the present proposal is the development and validation of a series of miniaturised photonic sensors for the implementation of PAT in pharmaceutical manufacturing. The sensors will be based on miniaturised photonic devices and will be able to work in the demanding conditions of a manufacturing environment. The sensors will be designed to cover the main stages of the manufacturing process: raw materials, API synthesis and purification, formulation and packaging. The main sensor targets will be: (i) at raw materials level: a near infrared (NIR) imaging system for powder characterisation; (ii) at API synthesis level: an NIR probe integrated in a microfluidic system for API synthesis; (iii) at formulation level: a Raman sensor for tablet manufacturing and a NIR system for coating monitoring; and (iv) at packaging level: a miniaturised Raman system for packaging inspection. The sensors will be developed and validated in three different pharmaceutical manufacturing processes (see Figure 1): (i) API synthesis, validation of the microfluidic NIR probe; (ii) tablet manufacturing, validation of the Raman and NIR systems; and (iii) packaging, validation of the Raman system. The sensors will be tested in the manufacturing environment at three industrial sites (the synthetic process at Almirall, the formulation process at Chiesi and the packaging process at BioNTech). The main objectives are: Objective 1. Design and develop miniaturised photonic sensors for pharmaceutical PAT (M1-M24) The objective is the design and development of miniaturised photonic sensors that can be integrated in the demanding manufacturing environment. The sensors will be based on miniaturised photonic devices and will be able to work in the demanding conditions of a manufacturing environment. The sensors will be designed to cover the main stages of the manufacturing process: raw materials, API synthesis and purification, formulation and packaging. A NIR imaging system will be designed for powder characterisation, a NIR probe will be integrated in a microfluidic system for API synthesis, a Raman sensor will be designed for tablet manufacturing and a NIR system for coating monitoring, and a miniaturised Raman system will be designed for packaging inspection (see Figure 1). The sensors will be designed for integration in the manufacturing environment at three industrial sites (the synthetic process at Almirall, the formulation process at Chiesi and the packaging process at BioNTech). Objective 2. Develop efficient data analysis tools for pharmaceutical PAT (M1-M36) Data analysis tools are key for providing relevant information to pharmaceutical operators. The objective is to develop data analysis tools including calibration transfer, data fusion and machine learning algorithms. The data analysis tools will be designed for the specific photonic sensors and pharmaceutical processes. Objective 3. Test and validate the photonic sensors in pharmaceutical manufacturing (M18-M36) The objective is to demonstrate the suitability of the developed photonic sensors in three different pharmaceutical manufacturing processes: API synthesis, tablet manufacturing and packaging. The sensors will be tested in the manufacturing environment at three industrial sites (the synthetic process at Almirall, the formulation process at Chiesi and the packaging process at BioNTech). Objective 4. Define a commercialization plan (M12-M36) The objective is to define a commercialization plan for the developed photonic sensors. The commercialization plan will be developed from the beginning of the project. The commercialization plan will be based on the development of a patent strategy and the definition of a business plan. 1.1.2 Relation to the work programme and expected impact 22 The project will contribute to the work programme under cluster 4 “Digital, Industry and Space”, destination “Advanced materials, technologies and sectors”. Specifically, the project will contribute to the topic “PHOTONICS-08-2020: Photonics-based sensors to improve process efficiency and product quality in pharmaceutical manufacturing”. The topic addresses the development of sensors for pharmaceutical manufacturing processes. The project will develop various miniaturised photonic sensors for pharmaceutical PAT. The sensors will be based on miniaturised photonic devices and will be able to work in the demanding conditions of a manufacturing environment. The sensors will be designed to cover the main stages of the manufacturing process: raw materials, API synthesis and purification, formulation and packaging. The project will address the entire process chain from sensor development to the validation in a manufacturing environment. The sensors will be developed and validated in three different pharmaceutical manufacturing processes (see Figure 1): (i) API synthesis, validation of the microfluidic NIR probe; (ii) tablet manufacturing, validation of the Raman and NIR systems; and (iii) packaging, validation of the Raman system. The sensors will be tested in the manufacturing environment at three industrial sites (the synthetic process at Almirall, the formulation process at Chiesi and the packaging process at BioNTech). The