=== Domain B: photonic sensors for pharmaceutical inline process analytical technology (PAT) ===
=== Section 4: Business case and exploitation strategy ===

4.1.5 MICRO-NANO-OPTICS FOR PHARMA (MNO4PHARMA) 4.1.5.1 Micro-Nano Optics for Pharma: Micro-Nano Optics for Pharma (MNO4PHARMA) is an SME that is a spin-off from the Institute of Photonic Sciences (ICFO) in Barcelona, Spain, and the Barcelona Science Park (PCB). Our core strength is in the development and application of innovative micro-nano optics technology for a wide range of applications, and our mission is to become a leading company in the field of micro-nano optics for pharmaceutical applications, offering innovative solutions to improve the pharmaceutical manufacturing processes and the quality of pharmaceutical products. We have significant experience in the field of micro-nano optics for pharmaceutical applications and have been involved in several projects in this area, including the development of micro-nano optics for pharmaceutical inline process analytical technology (PAT). 4.1.5.2 Products and services: We develop and manufacture a range of micro-nano optics-based sensors and devices for pharmaceutical applications, including micro-nano optics for inline process analytical technology (PAT), micro-nano optics for pharmaceutical packaging, and micro-nano optics for pharmaceutical quality control. Our products and services are designed to meet the specific needs of our customers and to help them improve their pharmaceutical manufacturing processes and the quality of their pharmaceutical products. 4.1.5.3 Potential interest for the project: Our potential interest in the project is to be involved in the development and application of micro-nano optics for pharmaceutical inline process analytical technology (PAT), and to contribute to the development of innovative micro-nano optics technology for pharmaceutical applications. We have significant experience in the field of micro-nano optics for pharmaceutical applications and can provide valuable insights and expertise to the project. 4.1.5.4 Roles and responsibilities: We will be responsible for the development and application of micro-nano optics for pharmaceutical inline process analytical technology (PAT), and we will contribute to the development of innovative micro-nano optics technology for pharmaceutical applications. We will also be responsible for the dissemination and exploitation of the results of the project. 4.1.5.5 Previous EU projects: We have been involved in several EU projects in the field of micro-nano optics for pharmaceutical applications, including the development of micro-nano optics for pharmaceutical inline process analytical technology (PAT). 4.1.5.6 Relevant publications: We have published several articles in peer-reviewed journals and conferences in the field of micro-nano optics for pharmaceutical applications. 4.1.5.7 Facilities and infrastructure: We have access to state-of-the-art facilities and infrastructure for the development and application of micro-nano optics for pharmaceutical applications, including clean rooms, lithography facilities, and optical characterization facilities. 4.1.5.8 Previous or current collaborations with other beneficiaries or linked third parties: We have previous collaborations with other beneficiaries and linked third parties in the field of micro-nano optics for pharmaceutical applications, including the development of micro-nano optics for pharmaceutical inline process analytical technology (PAT). 4.1.5.9 Other: We are committed to promoting gender equality in our organization and in the projects we participate in. We have implemented policies and practices to ensure equal opportunities for men and women in terms of recruitment, promotion, and working conditions. We strive to create a diverse and inclusive workplace that values and respects the contributions of all employees, regardless of gender. We are committed to fostering a culture of equality and non-discrimination and to promoting the active participation of women in our organization and in the projects we participate in. 4.1.6 INTRASOFT INTERNATIONAL (INTRA) 4.1.6.1 Intrasoft International (INTRA) is a multinational software development company that provides a wide range of software solutions and services to a diverse clientele, including government agencies, international organizations, and private sector companies. Founded in 1977, we have a long history of delivering innovative software solutions that meet the needs of our clients and help them achieve their goals. With a workforce of over 1,300 highly skilled professionals, we have the expertise and resources to tackle complex software development projects across a variety of industries. Our services include software development, system integration, digital transformation, cloud computing, and data analytics, among others. We have a strong track record of delivering successful projects for clients in Europe, the Middle East, and Africa, and we are committed to delivering high-quality solutions that drive business success. 4.1.6.2 Products and services: We provide a wide range of software solutions and services, including software development, system integration, digital transformation, cloud computing, and data analytics. 4.1.6.3 Potential interest for the project: Our potential interest in the project is to be involved in the development of innovative software solutions for pharmaceutical applications, and to