=== Domain A: NIR spectroscopy for real-time food quality control in smart manufacturing lines ===
=== Section 2_1: Expected outcomes and impacts ===

3.1.3 Expected impacts

Expected impacts of the project proposed in the call are described in this section. These impacts are in the short term and are a reflection of the activities and the results of the project.

The short-term impacts of the project will be:

1. The application of the project results and the dissemination and exploitation activities will contribute to a return on investment in research and development in Europe, which is necessary for the impact and return on investment in research and development to be realised. The return on investment in research and development is crucial for the impact and return on investment in research and development. The knowledge generated in the project will be used to develop an innovative sustainable food production method with reduced environmental impact and less use of energy and resources.

2. The project’s results will be disseminated and exploited in the scientific community and in the food industry. The results of the project will be used by the food industry to improve the quality of their products and to reduce the carbon footprint of their production.

3. The project is expected to have a significant impact on the competitiveness of the European food industry. The development of innovative food production methods will improve the quality of the food products and the competitiveness of the European food industry on the global market.

4. The project will contribute to a more sustainable food production system in Europe. The use of renewable energy sources and the reduction of the carbon footprint of the production process will contribute to a more sustainable food production system in Europe.

5. The project contributes to the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions in Europe. The development of innovative food production methods will reduce the carbon footprint of the production process and contribute to the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions in Europe.

6. The project contributes to the realisation of the European Green Deal. The project’s results will be used to develop an innovative sustainable food production method with reduced environmental impact and less use of energy and resources. This will contribute to the realisation of the European Green Deal.

7. The project contributes to the realisation of the Sustainable Development Goals. The project’s results will be used to develop an innovative sustainable food production method with reduced environmental impact and less use of energy and resources. This will contribute to the realisation of the Sustainable Development Goals.

8. The project contributes to the realisation of the priorities of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. The project’s results will be used to develop an innovative sustainable food production method with reduced environmental impact and less use of energy and resources. This will contribute to the realisation of the priorities of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.

9. The project contributes to the realisation of the priorities of the Paris Agreement. The project’s results will be used to develop an innovative sustainable food production method with reduced environmental impact and less use of energy and resources. This will contribute to the realisation of the priorities of the Paris Agreement.

10. The project contributes to the realisation of the priorities of the European Strategic Energy Technology Plan. The project’s results will be used to develop an innovative sustainable food production method with reduced environmental impact and less use of energy and resources. This will contribute to the realisation of the priorities of the European Strategic Energy Technology Plan.

11. The project contributes to the realisation of the priorities of the European Energy Research Alliance. The project’s results will be used to develop an innovative sustainable food production method with reduced environmental impact and less use of energy and resources. This will contribute to the realisation of the priorities of the European Energy Research Alliance.

12. The project contributes to the realisation of the priorities of the European Climate Research Alliance. The project’s results will be used to develop an innovative sustainable food production method with reduced environmental impact and less use of energy and resources. This will contribute to the realisation of the priorities of the European Climate Research Alliance.

13. The project contributes to the realisation of the priorities of the European Research Area. The project’s results will be used to develop an innovative sustainable food production method with reduced environmental impact and less use of energy and resources. This will contribute to the realisation of the priorities of the European Research Area.

14. The project contributes to the realisation of the priorities of the European Innovation Partnership on Smart Cities and Communities. The project’s results will be used to develop an innovative sustainable food production method with reduced environmental impact and less use of energy and resources. This will contribute to the realisation of the priorities of the European Innovation Partnership on Smart Cities and Communities.

15. The project contributes to the realisation of the priorities of the European Innovation Partnership on Agricultural Productivity and Sustainability. The project’s results will be used to develop an innovative sustainable food production method with reduced environmental impact and less use of energy and resources. This will contribute to the realisation of the priorities of the European Innovation Partnership on Agricultural Productivity and Sustainability.

16. The project contributes to the realisation of the priorities of the European Innovation Partnership on Active and Healthy Ageing. The project’s results will be