=== Domain B: photonic sensors for pharmaceutical inline process analytical technology (PAT) ===
=== Section 2_2: Dissemination, exploitation and communication ===

2.2 Measures to maximise impact - Measures to maximise project impact 2.2.1. Plan for the dissemination and exploitation including communication activities 2.2.1.1. Dissemination and exploitation plan 2.2.1.1.1. Summary of main dissemination and exploitation activities Our main dissemination and exploitation activities are aimed at the achievement of the expected outcomes and impacts of our project – including those described in section 2.1.1, as well as the creation of a sustainable business model. Our dissemination and exploitation activities will be carried out in parallel to the technical activities (WP2-6), so that the information and knowledge gained from our research can be made publicly available and used while the project is still running if possible, and to create awareness about the project and its results among the relevant stakeholders during the project (see sections 2.2.1.1.3 and 2.2.1.1.4). We will communicate our results to the relevant stakeholders, including the academic and scientific community (by publishing in high-impact journals and presenting at relevant conferences and workshops), the pharmaceutical industry (by presenting at relevant industry workshops and publishing in industrial magazines and newsletters), the public (by publishing on the project website and social media, and interacting with schools and the general public), and policy makers (by presenting at policy events and publishing policy briefs). In terms of the exploitation of the project results, we will identify relevant commercialisation pathways and explore options to support further development and exploitation of the project results beyond the project duration. We will also assess the possibility of using the project results for educational activities, thus extending the impact of our project. Table 2 summarises our main dissemination and exploitation activities and the expected timing of these activities. Our project will deliver 7 scientific publications (D6.1), 3 industrial publications (D6.2), and 2 project videos (D6.3). The number of scientific publications has been estimated based on the number of journal articles published by the partners in the last 3 years in the field of our project according to Scopus. The number of industrial publications has been estimated based on the number of articles published by the partners in the last 3 years in industry magazines and newsletters. The number of videos has been estimated based on our experience from previous projects. Table 2. Main dissemination and exploitation activities and their timing Main dissemination and exploitation activities Timing Scientific publications (7) M12, M18, M24, M30, M36 Industrial publications (3) M24, M30, M36 Project videos (2) M12, M36 Conference presentations (10) M3, M6, M12, M18, M24, M30, M36 Industry workshops (3) M24, M30, M36 Project website M1-36 Social media M1-36 Industry newsletters M6, M12, M18, M24, M30, M36 Industry newsletters M12, M18, M24, M30, M36 Industry webinars (3) M24, M30, M36 School visits (2) M18, M36 Policy briefs (2) M12, M36 Stakeholder workshop M30 2.2.1.1.2. Individual dissemination and exploitation plan of each project partner Table 3 shows the individual dissemination and exploitation actions that will be led by each project partner. Table 3. Individual dissemination and exploitation actions Partner Scientific publications Industrial publications Conference presentations Industry workshops Project website Social media Industry newsletters Industry webinars School visits Policy briefs Stakeholder workshop Role in Dissemination & Exploitation IRIS X X X X X X X X X Lead IRISX X X X X X X X X X Lead KETEK X X X X X X X X X X X Lead HES X X X X X X X X X X Lead INESC X X X X X X X X X X X Lead INTEG X X X X X X X X X X X Lead XIO X X X X X X X X X X Lead CSEM X X X X X X X X X X Lead TUD X X X X X X X X X X Lead Table 4 summarises the main exploitation activities that will be carried out by the partners. These activities will be carried out by the partners to ensure the successful commercialisation and exploitation of the project results beyond the project duration. Table 4. Summary of main exploitation activities Partner Exploitation activities IRIS IRIS will exploit the results from our project for the development of new products. Such products will be based on the integration of the developed technology and the sensors developed by IRIS in the context of the project, i.e. the IRIS NIR sensor and the IRIS miniNIR sensor. IRIS will also exploit the developed sensors for the improvement of the currently available products. IRIS will be the