=== Domain A: NIR spectroscopy for real-time food quality control in smart manufacturing lines ===
=== Section 1_3: Methodology and approach ===

1 1.3 - Description of the methodology and the type of knowledge we aim to generate

1.3.1. Technical approach and methodology

The innovative approach for the implementation of the NIR spectroscopy technology in the smart manufacturing lines is based on our experience in the implementation of such systems in other applications (e.g., food applications for quality assessment in products such as honey, olive oil, meat, dairy). The principle of the method is to record the NIR spectra of a certain number of samples that are representative of the variability of the product quality parameters (e.g., moisture, protein content, etc.). The spectra are then correlated with the reference data through chemometric algorithms to generate the so-called “calibration models”. These models can then be used for the prediction of the quality parameters of future samples from their NIR spectra. The models can be implemented in a cloud platform, allowing the deployment of a remote monitoring system for the plants based on the data from the sensors installed in the plants.

The approach we will use for the implementation of the innovative solution is described in Figure 1.

The first stage of the project will be the understanding of the requirements for the solution of the four use cases. This will be done through a series of meetings with the partners from the different use cases in order to understand the product specifications and the requirements for the integration of the NIR spectroscopy system in the smart manufacturing lines. The output of this stage will be a document with the requirements for the solution of the four use cases.

The second stage will be the installation of the NIR spectroscopy system in the plants, which will be used for the collection of the data for the generation of the calibration models. The data will be collected for a period of 2-3 months, which is considered enough for the generation of the calibration models. During this stage, the data will be collected and annotated in order to increase the quality of the data and reduce the number of outliers in the dataset.

The third stage will be the generation of the calibration models for the prediction of the quality parameters for each use case. The calibration models will be evaluated using independent data and the models with the best performance will be selected for the implementation in the cloud platform.

The fourth stage will be the evaluation of the performance of the solution in the plants. The solution will be evaluated using a series of KPIs that are related to the quality of the product and the efficiency of the plant.

1.3.2. Knowledge generated

The knowledge generated in the project will be related to the implementation of the NIR spectroscopy technology for the quality control of the four products in the smart manufacturing lines. This knowledge will be related to the requirements for the implementation of the technology in the manufacturing lines, the generation of the calibration models for the prediction of the quality parameters of the products, and the evaluation of the performance of the solution in the plants. The knowledge generated will be used for the development of the innovative solution and will be disseminated through the exploitation plan.

1.4 - Impact (potential impact of the project)

1.4.1. Impact for the four use cases

The impact of the project will be related to the reduction of the wastes in the manufacturing lines, which will result in a more sustainable production process. This will be possible through the implementation of the NIR spectroscopy technology in the smart manufacturing lines, which will allow the quality control of the products in real-time, enabling the detection of deviations from the specifications and the correction of the process parameters to bring the product back to the specifications. The impact of the project will be demonstrated through the reduction of the wastes in the manufacturing lines, which will be quantified through the KPIs.

The impact of the project on the four use cases will be related to the reduction of the wastes in the manufacturing lines, which will result in a more sustainable production process. This will be possible through the implementation of the NIR spectroscopy technology in the smart manufacturing lines, which will allow the quality control of the products in real-time, enabling the detection of deviations from the specifications and the correction of the process parameters to bring the product back to the specifications. The impact of the project will be demonstrated through the reduction of the wastes in the manufacturing lines, which will be quantified through the KPIs. The cost savings through the reduction of the wastes in the manufacturing lines is estimated to be 0.3 M€ for the four use cases.

In addition to the reduction of the wastes in the manufacturing lines, the implementation of the NIR spectroscopy technology in the smart manufacturing lines will allow the implementation of a digital twin for the manufacturing process, which will enable the optimization of the process parameters to improve the quality of the product and the efficiency of the manufacturing process. This will be possible through the implementation of a machine learning algorithm that will use the data from the NIR spectroscopy system to optimize the process parameters. The impact of the project on the four use cases will be related to the optimization of