=== Domain C: hyperspectral imaging for automated plastic waste sorting in circular economy facilities ===
=== Section 3_1: Work plan and work packages ===

3.1 Work plan 3.1.1 Work packages 3.1.1.1 WP1 Objectives (max. 1000 characters) WP1 will coordinate the entire project and monitor its progress. As the project is composed of various interlinked WPs, a good coordination and project management is crucial to achieve the objectives within the given time and budget. The progress of WP1 will be monitored and reported at the project meetings and in the deliverables. Task 1.2 is about the coordination of the project, ensuring the timely achievement of the milestones and deliverables, and the smooth communication between the partners. Task 1.3 is about communication towards a wider audience, including the project website and other dissemination activities. Task 1.4 is dedicated to the exploitation of the project results, which is crucial for the success of the project. Task 1.5 is dedicated to IPR management. Work plan and resources The work plan is organized into 8 WPs. WP1 will coordinate the entire project and monitor its progress. WP2 will establish the requirements and specifications for sorting and washing technologies and for the use of recycled materials. WP3 will develop and optimise a spectral database for the automated sorting of plastic waste. WP4 will focus on the integration of optical sorting and/or washing technologies and the use of recycled materials. WP5 will evaluate the environmental, economic, and social impacts of the project results. WP6 will develop and implement a communication and dissemination strategy. WP7 will be dedicated to project management. WP8 will perform a risk analysis and quality management. We have selected the most appropriate WPs considering the nature of our project. WP1 Management Task 1.1 Project initiation and management (IRIS) The first task of the project is project management. It will cover the following activities: • Project administration; • Project administration; • Financial and contractual coordination; • Technical coordination; • Progress monitoring; • Risk analysis; • Quality management. Task 1.2 Coordination (IRIS) The coordination of the project will be done by IRIS. The main objectives of this task are: • To ensure the timely achievement of the milestones and deliverables; • To ensure the smooth communication between the partners; • To organize and chair the project meetings; • To prepare the agendas and minutes of the project meetings; • To ensure the communication between the consortium and the EC; • To prepare the periodic and final reports; • To monitor the progress of the project. Task 1.3 Project website and communication tools (IRIS) The project website will be established to inform the public and the scientific community on the project results. The website will be kept updated with the latest information on the project achievements. The website will be developed at the beginning of the project and will be maintained during the entire duration of the project. The dissemination material will be produced and updated during the entire duration of the project. Task 1.4 Dissemination and exploitation (IRIS) The main objectives of this task are: • To disseminate the project results to a wider audience; • To prepare a dissemination and exploitation plan; • To organize workshops and seminars; • To prepare dissemination material; • To participate in conferences; • To prepare scientific papers; • To prepare a report on the exploitation of the project results. Task 1.5 IPR management (IRIS) The main objectives of this task are: • To prepare a consortium agreement; • To prepare an IPR management plan; • To identify foreground and background; • To prepare an IP management strategy; • To prepare an IP management plan; • To prepare an IP management report. WP2 User requirements and specifications Task 2.1 Requirements and specifications for sorting and washing technologies (MBT) The main objective of this task is to define the specifications for sorting and washing technologies. The specifications will be based on the requirements of the end-users. The specifications will be defined for the following technologies: • Sorting technologies; • Washing technologies. Task 2.2 Requirements and specifications for the use of recycled materials (MBT) The main objective of this task is to define the specifications for the use of recycled materials. The specifications will be based on the requirements of the end-users. The specifications will be defined for the following applications: • Food packaging; • Personal care; • Textiles; • Construction. Task 2.3 User needs (MBT) The main objective of this task is to identify the user needs. The user needs will be identified for the following technologies: • Sorting technologies; • Washing technologies; • Use of recycled materials. WP3 Spectral database for automated sorting Task 3.1 Spectral data acquisition (IRIS) The main objective of this task is to acquire the spectral data. The spectral data will be acquired for the following materials: • LDPE; • HDPE; • PP; • PET; • PS; • PVC; • PA;