=== Domain C: hyperspectral imaging for automated plastic waste sorting in circular economy facilities ===
=== Section 3_3: Consortium as a whole ===

2. Excellence
2.1 Objectives
The overall objective of the proposed project is to develop a hyperspectral imaging system (HSI) for the sorting of plastic waste in circular economy (CE) facilities. The system, which will be based on the use of artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) tools, will be designed to be used in CE facilities for improving the efficiency of the sorting process, as well as for reducing the manual labour required for this activity. It will be designed to be used in CE facilities with existing sorting equipment, such as conveyor belts and sorting chutes. It will be optimized for the detection and classification of the main plastic polymers found in the waste stream, with the aim of improving the quality of the secondary raw materials that are produced by this process.
The specific objectives of the project are:
1. To develop a hyperspectral imaging system for the sorting of plastic waste in CE facilities, which will be based on the use of AI and ML tools.
2. To optimize the hyperspectral imaging system for the detection and classification of the main plastic polymers found in the waste stream.
3. To optimize the hyperspectral imaging system for being used in CE facilities with existing sorting equipment.
4. To develop a sorting algorithm based on the use of AI and ML tools for the identification of the main plastic polymers found in the waste stream.
5. To design and develop a hyperspectral imaging system that will be based on the sorting algorithm.
6. To design and develop a hyperspectral imaging system that will be based on the sorting algorithm, which will be optimized for being used in CE facilities with existing sorting equipment.
7. To perform a validation of the hyperspectral imaging system in a CE facility.
8. To perform a demonstration of the hyperspectral imaging system in a CE facility.
9. To perform a techno-economic assessment of the hyperspectral imaging system.
10. To perform an environmental assessment of the hyperspectral imaging system.
11. To prepare a plan for the exploitation and dissemination of the results of the project.
12. To prepare a plan for the communication of the results of the project.
In order to achieve these objectives, the project will be divided into the following work packages (WP):
WP1 will be dedicated to the management of the project. It will be coordinated by the management team of the consortium. This WP will be divided into two tasks (T1.1 and T1.2). T1.1 will be dedicated to the preparation of the Strategic Innovation and Business Plan (SIBP) and of the Exploitation and Dissemination Plan (EDP). T1.2 will be dedicated to the preparation of the Communication Plan (CP).
WP2 will be dedicated to the definition of the requirements of the hyperspectral imaging system and to the development of the sorting algorithm. It will be coordinated by the coordinator of the consortium. This WP will be divided into two tasks (T2.1 and T2.2). T2.1 will be dedicated to the definition of the requirements of the hyperspectral imaging system. T2.2 will be dedicated to the development of the sorting algorithm.
WP3 will be dedicated to the development of the hyperspectral imaging system. It will be coordinated by the partner who will be in charge of the development of the hyperspectral imaging system. This WP will be divided into three tasks (T3.1, T3.2 and T3.3). T3.1 will be dedicated to the design of the hyperspectral imaging system. T3.2 will be dedicated to the development of the hyperspectral imaging system. T3.3 will be dedicated to the integration of the hyperspectral imaging system.
WP4 will be dedicated to the validation and demonstration of the hyperspectral imaging system. It will be coordinated by the coordinator of the consortium. This WP will be divided into two tasks (T4.1 and T4.2). T4.1 will be dedicated to the validation of the hyperspectral imaging system. T4.2 will be dedicated to the demonstration of the hyperspectral imaging system.
WP5 will be dedicated to the assessment of the hyperspectral imaging system. It will be coordinated by the coordinator of the consortium. This WP will be divided into two tasks (T5.1 and T5.2). T5.1 will be dedicated to the techno-economic assessment of the hyperspectral imaging system. T5.2 will be dedicated to the environmental assessment of the hyperspectral imaging system.
WP6 will be dedicated to the management of the project. It will be coordinated by the management team of the consortium. This WP will be divided into three tasks (T6.1, T6.2 and T6.3). T6.1 will be dedicated to the management of the consortium. T6.2 will be dedicated to the preparation of the periodic reports. T6.3 will be dedicated to the preparation of the final