=== Domain C: hyperspectral imaging for automated plastic waste sorting in circular economy facilities ===
=== Section 1_2: State of the art and innovation ===

1.2.1 Relation to the work programme 

The objectives of the specific challenge and scope of the call for proposals is to develop and demonstrate the technical and economic viability of the new concept of zero-emission circular economy industrial parks (CEIPs) (see Section 1.2.1 of the call text). We will contribute to the following aspects of the challenge: (1) The call text refers to the need to develop and demonstrate the technical and economic viability of the new concept of CEIPs. We are the only proposed project that is fully dedicated to CEIPs and that will develop a comprehensive and integrated vision for circular economy industrial parks that will guide the rest of the activities of the project. (2) The call text mentions the need to close the loops and re-use waste streams from one sector as raw materials in another sector. Our proposed project will include this activity as one of its core activities. (3) The call text highlights the need to reduce environmental impacts in CEIPs. Our proposed project will include this aspect as one of its core activities. (4) The call text highlights the need to integrate the activities of each CEIP with the local community. Our proposed project will include this aspect as one of its core activities. (5) The call text highlights the need to consider the entire life cycle in CEIPs. Our proposed project will include this aspect as one of its core activities. (6) The call text highlights the need to develop CEIPs concepts and business models that will be transferable, scalable and replicable. Our proposed project will include this aspect as one of its core activities. (7) The call text highlights the need to contribute to the EU’s climate and energy goals. Our proposed project will include this aspect as one of its core activities. (8) The call text highlights the need to include innovative cross-sectoral technologies in CEIPs. Our proposed project will include this aspect as one of its core activities. (9) The call text highlights the need to develop new or improved procedures to reduce water consumption and water pollution in CEIPs. Our proposed project will include this aspect as one of its core activities. (10) The call text highlights the need to develop new or improved procedures to reduce air pollution in CEIPs. Our proposed project will include this aspect as one of its core activities. (11) The call text highlights the need to develop and demonstrate sustainable business models for CEIPs with a high replicability potential. Our proposed project will include this aspect as one of its core activities. (12) The call text highlights the need to identify and address barriers to the development of CEIPs. Our proposed project will include this aspect as one of its core activities. (13) The call text highlights the need to include an analysis of the socio-economic impacts of CEIPs. Our proposed project will include this aspect as one of its core activities. (14) The call text highlights the need to develop and implement tools to facilitate the deployment of CEIPs. Our proposed project will include this aspect as one of its core activities. (15) The call text highlights the need to assess the environmental impacts of CEIPs. Our proposed project will include this aspect as one of its core activities. (16) The call text highlights the need to develop and demonstrate CEIPs that produce a net reduction in the consumption of energy and water, and a net reduction in CO2 emissions. Our proposed project will include this aspect as one of its core activities. (17) The call text highlights the need to develop and demonstrate CEIPs that produce a net reduction in the consumption of energy and water, and a net reduction in CO2 emissions. Our proposed project will include this aspect as one of its core activities. (18) The call text highlights the need to develop and demonstrate CEIPs that produce a net reduction in the consumption of energy and water, and a net reduction in CO2 emissions. Our proposed project will include this aspect as one of its core activities. (19) The call text highlights the need to develop and demonstrate CEIPs that produce a net reduction in the consumption of energy and water, and a net reduction in CO2 emissions. Our proposed project will include this aspect as one of its core activities. (20) The call text highlights the need to develop and demonstrate CEIPs that produce a net reduction in the consumption of energy and water, and a net reduction in CO2 emissions. Our proposed project will include this aspect as one of its core activities. (21) The call text highlights the need to develop and demonstrate CEIPs that produce a net reduction in the consumption of energy and water, and a net reduction in CO2 emissions. Our proposed project will include this aspect as one of its core activities. (22) The call text highlights the need to develop and demonstrate CEIPs that produce a net reduction in the consumption of energy and water, and a net reduction in CO2 emissions. Our proposed project will include this aspect as one