=== Domain A: NIR spectroscopy for real-time food quality control in smart manufacturing lines ===
=== Section 1_1: Objectives and ambition ===

1.1.1 Objectives
The main objective of the H2020-NMBP-TO-IND-2018-2020 project is to develop a new technology to detect and quantify food fraud and contamination in real time in a smart manufacturing line for the dairy, meat and fish industries. This will be done by developing a new Near Infrared (NIR) instrument and a novel data analysis approach for food quality control. The NIR spectrometer will be integrated in a smart manufacturing line where it will be tested and validated.
The main results will be: a prototype of a novel NIR instrument, a novel data analysis approach, and a demonstration of the NIR instrument in a smart manufacturing line.
The novel NIR instrument will be based on an array of up to 15 micro-opto-electro-mechanical system (MOEMS) filters, and a photovoltaic photodetector array. The instrument will be integrated in a smart manufacturing line for the dairy, meat and fish industries. The NIR instrument will be connected with the manufacturing line control system, and the AI-based data analysis system, and feedback control will be implemented. The NIR instrument will be tested and validated in a smart manufacturing line for the dairy, meat and fish industries. In addition, the NIR instrument will be used to collect a database for NIR food quality control.
The novel data analysis approach will be based on AI and deep learning techniques. The AI-based data analysis system will be connected with the manufacturing line control system, and feedback control will be implemented. The AI-based data analysis system will be tested and validated.
The project will be carried out by a consortium of five partners from four different European countries. The consortium comprises a photonics technology developer (IRIS), a photonics components developer (ALEN), a software developer (CARTIF), and two food producers (COMITÉ DE LECHE, and PESCANOVA).
1.1.2. Relation to the work programme
The project aims to develop a new technology to detect and quantify food fraud and contamination in real time in a smart manufacturing line for the dairy, meat and fish industries. This will be done by developing a new Near Infrared (NIR) instrument and a novel data analysis approach for food quality control. The NIR spectrometer will be integrated in a smart manufacturing line where it will be tested and validated.
The project is in line with the NMBP-TO-IND-2018-2020 call and specifically with the topic NMBP-17-2018. The technological development of the NIR instrument will address the need of photonics for food quality control. The novel NIR instrument will be based on an array of up to 15 micro-opto-electro-mechanical system (MOEMS) filters, and a photovoltaic photodetector array. The instrument will be integrated in a smart manufacturing line for the dairy, meat and fish industries. The NIR instrument will be connected with the manufacturing line control system, and the AI-based data analysis system, and feedback control will be implemented. The NIR instrument will be tested and validated in a smart manufacturing line for the dairy, meat and fish industries. In addition, the NIR instrument will be used to collect a database for NIR food quality control.
The novel data analysis approach will be based on AI and deep learning techniques. The AI-based data analysis system will be connected with the manufacturing line control system, and feedback control will be implemented. The AI-based data analysis system will be tested and validated.
The project will be carried out by a consortium of five partners from four different European countries. The consortium comprises a photonics technology developer (IRIS), a photonics components developer (ALEN), a software developer (CARTIF), and two food producers (COMITÉ DE LECHE, and PESCANOVA).
The project is in line with the NMBP-TO-IND-2018-2020 call and specifically with the topic NMBP-17-2018. The technological development of the NIR instrument will address the need of photonics for food quality control. The novel NIR instrument will be based on an array of up to 15 micro-opto-electro-mechanical system (MOEMS) filters, and a photovoltaic photodetector array. The instrument will be integrated in a smart manufacturing line for the dairy, meat and fish industries. The NIR instrument will be connected with the manufacturing line control system, and the AI-based data analysis system, and feedback control will be implemented. The NIR instrument will be tested and validated in a smart manufacturing line for the dairy, meat and fish industries. In addition, the NIR instrument will be used to collect a database for NIR food quality control.
The novel data analysis approach will be based on AI and deep learning techniques. The AI-based data analysis system will be connected with the manufacturing line control