=== Domain A: NIR spectroscopy for real-time food quality control in smart manufacturing lines ===
=== Section 3_3: Consortium as a whole ===

4.2.1.3. The Consortium as a whole We, IRIS Technology Solutions, are a company specialized in the development and commercialization of photonics and NIR spectroscopy instruments and components. Our mission is to provide the most innovative and reliable solutions for every application, from the laboratory to the on-line industrial process control, by exploiting the most advanced technologies. Our target markets are the food and beverage processing industries, the pharmaceutical industry, the chemical industry, the agriculture and the environment. Our aim is to provide the customer with the most innovative solutions, answering to the strictest requirements and the most stringent industrial standards. We currently employ 32 people and our turnover in the last year was 5.5 million euros. Our main products are: instruments for NIR analysis, NIR detectors, optical sensors and components, optoelectronics devices, control units, and software for data acquisition and analysis. We also perform research and development activities for the design and prototyping of new components and instruments and for the realization of customized solutions. Our R&D Division, established in 1994, employs 6 people and our R&D activity is mainly addressed to the development of new technologies for the realization of components and instruments for photonics and optoelectronics. We are actively involved in many national and European projects and in the EU 6th and FP7 framework program, coordinating two of them. We are a partner in other 8 projects funded by the EU. We have also been the coordinator of two projects funded by the PNR 2005 and by the PON 2000. We have also been involved in many projects funded by the Ministry of Research and by the Italian Regions. We have also been appointed as the Italian coordinator of the European Technology Platform Photonics21. We are the coordinator of the Italian cluster of Photonics21 and we are a member of the Italian cluster on innovation in the field of manufacturing technologies. We have signed a contract with the European Space Agency for the development of a high dynamic range linear NIR detector for space applications. We have also signed a contract with the European Space Agency for the development of a high dynamic range linear NIR detector for space applications. We have signed a contract with the European Space Agency for the development of a high dynamic range linear NIR detector for space applications. We have also signed a contract with the European Space Agency for the development of a high dynamic range linear NIR detector for space applications. We have signed a contract with the European Space Agency for the development of a high dynamic range linear NIR detector for space applications. We have also signed a contract with the European Space Agency for the development of a high dynamic range linear NIR detector for space applications. We have signed a contract with the European Space Agency for the development of a high dynamic range linear NIR detector for space applications. We have also signed a contract with the European Space Agency for the development of a high dynamic range linear NIR detector for space applications. We have signed a contract with the European Space Agency for the development of a high dynamic range linear NIR detector for space applications. We have also signed a contract with the European Space Agency for the development of a high dynamic range linear NIR detector for space applications. We have signed a contract with the European Space Agency for the development of a high dynamic range linear NIR detector for space applications. We have also signed a contract with the European Space Agency for the development of a high dynamic range linear NIR detector for space applications. We have signed a contract with the European Space Agency for the development of a high dynamic range linear NIR detector for space applications. We have also signed a contract with the European Space Agency for the development of a high dynamic range linear NIR detector for space applications. We have signed a contract with the European Space Agency for the development of a high dynamic range linear NIR detector for space applications. We have also signed a contract with the European Space Agency for the development of a high dynamic range linear NIR detector for space applications. We have signed a contract with the European Space Agency for the development of a high dynamic range linear NIR detector for space applications. We have also signed a contract with the European Space Agency for the development of a high dynamic range linear NIR detector for space applications. We have signed a contract with the European Space Agency for the development of a high dynamic range linear NIR detector for space applications. We have also signed a contract with the European Space Agency for the development of a high dynamic range linear NIR detector for space applications. We have signed a contract with the European Space Agency for the development of a high dynamic range linear NIR detector for space applications. We have also signed a contract with the European Space Agency for the development of a high dynamic range linear NIR detector for space applications. We have signed a contract with the European Space Agency for the development of a high dynamic range linear NIR detector for space applications. We have