=== Domain B: photonic sensors for pharmaceutical inline process analytical technology (PAT) ===
=== Section 3_2: Management structure and procedures ===

1.3.2. Measures to maximise impact  
The impact of our project will be maximised through our consortium structure, our dissemination activities and through our strategy to exploit our new technology.  

1.3.2.1. Our consortium structure  
The consortium has been carefully selected to combine the necessary competences to maximise the impact of our project. We have included key European industrial end-users, in a number of sectors, that will be part of our validation activities. Our industrial end-users will receive our new technology first, and will be able to see the benefits of using our technology directly in their production line, so they will be our first customers. We have also included an SME, IRIS, to commercialise our technology, as well as an industrial research organisation, TNO, to support IRIS in the validation activities, so we can guarantee a successful commercialisation of our new technology.  

1.3.2.2. Dissemination and exploitation activities  
In Table 14, we describe the dissemination activities we plan to carry out during the different phases of our project. Our new technology has a high potential for commercialisation, so we will dedicate significant effort to the exploitation of our results. The SME in our consortium, IRIS, will lead our exploitation activities, supported by our partners. We plan to create a new business unit within IRIS to commercialise our new technology, which will be led by one of our partners, TNO. To prepare for the commercialisation of our technology, we will develop an exploitation plan during our project, which will be updated regularly. We will also develop a business plan and conduct a market analysis, as well as an IP strategy.  

Table 14. Dissemination activities during our project  
Dissemination activity Description Target audience Period  
Websites IRIS’ website will be updated with results from our project and links to the project website. Stakeholders in the field of process analytical technologies (PAT) Continuous  
Project website A dedicated website for our project will be developed. It will include information about our project, as well as related documents, such as our newsletters, press releases, etc. Stakeholders in the field of PAT Continuous  
Social media Use of social media channels (Twitter, LinkedIn) to post information about our project. Stakeholders in the field of PAT Continuous  
Scientific publications Selection of the most relevant results from our project to be published in scientific journals. Scientific community, stakeholders in the field of PAT Continuous  
Scientific conferences Presentation of results from our project in scientific conferences. Scientific community Continuous  
Press releases and interviews Interviews and press releases about Consortium members, dissemination activities Continuous  
our project will be designed to maximise the impact of our new technology.  
Figure 1.6. Our innovation management activities  
1.3.3. Summary  
Our new technology will involve 6 new technologies developed by 4 different partners. We have a consortium formed by 5 partners from 4 different countries, with a good balance between research organisations and industry. Our new technology has a high potential for commercialisation, so we have designed our project to maximise the impact of our project results, and we have included in our consortium the necessary expertise to do so.  
1.4. Members of the consortium  

1.4.1. Organisation description  
IRIS Technology Solutions (IRIS) is an SME from the Netherlands, founded in 2001. IRIS is a technology company which provides innovative solutions for the analysis of complex materials. IRIS has expertise in the field of photonics, optics, spectroscopy, and advanced data analysis. IRIS has been involved in many publicly funded projects, including a number of Horizon 2020 projects. IRIS will bring in the necessary expertise for the development of the optical components and the analytical software for the analysis of the spectral data. IRIS will lead WP1 and WP5, and will contribute to the other WPs where necessary.  
The R&D department of TNO (TNO) is a research organisation from the Netherlands. TNO provides innovative solutions in a number of different sectors. TNO has been involved in many publicly funded projects, including a number of Horizon 2020 projects. TNO will bring in the necessary expertise for the development of the advanced sensors and the analytical software for the analysis of the spectral data. TNO will lead WP2 and WP6, and will contribute to the other WPs where necessary.  
BASF SE (BASF) is an industrial company from Germany, specialising in chemicals. BASF provides innovative solutions for a number of different sectors, including the chemicals sector. BASF has been involved in publicly funded projects in the past. BASF will bring in their expertise in the chemical sector, and they will participate in the validation activities of our project. BASF will contribute to WP3, WP5 and WP7.  
Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH (Boehringer) is